The Bajaur campaign refers to an armed conflict between Afghanistan and Pakistan that took place from September 1960 to September 1961 in Bajaur, Pakistan, following a full-scale incursion by Royal Afghan Army troops into the region after just over a decade of continuous cross-border skirmishes with Pakistani forces along the Pakistan-Afghanistan border. The conflict ended after Afghan forces were repelled from the region, and led to a break-off in diplomatic relations between the two nations.


== Background ==
Relations between the two states of Afghanistan and Pakistan have been strained ever since the latter gained independence from the United Kingdom following the Partition of British India in August 1947. Following partition, the Kingdom of Afghanistan was the only country to vote against the Dominion of Pakistan's admission into the United Nations as a recognized sovereign state. Moreover, Afghanistan did not recognize the Durand Line that is the Pakistan-Afghanistan border (which Pakistan had inherited from British India and which Afghanistan marked itself), Due to this large illicit territorial claims over the western regions of Pakistan—roughly corresponding with the modern-day Pakistani provinces of Balochistan and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa relations between the two countires soured, Afghanistan started funding proxies and initiated regular skirmishes with Pakistan along the border. By 1948, Afghanistan was providing armaments and funding to proxies inside the Tirah and Razmak regions of northwest Pakistan. In the late 1950s, the Royal Afghan Army heavily shelled the Pakistani village of Dobandi and subsequently crossed the border and occupied a strategically vital railway link in Chaman−Quetta. The incursion prompted a large Pakistani offensive, following which the Pakistan Army retook the pass and pushed Afghan troops back to the border after a week of heavy fighting. Relations between the two states severely deteriorated in 1951, when Saad Akbar Babrak, an Afghan national, assassinated the then Prime Minister of Pakistan, Liaquat Ali Khan, in Rawalpindi during a public rally. On 30 March 1955, Afghan demonstrators attacked and torched the Pakistani embassy in Kabul and consulates in Kandahar and Jalalabad, following which diplomatic relations were severed by Pakistan. The areas surrounding Bajaur saw extensive armed border skirmishes between Afghanistan and Pakistan from 1949 to 1960.


== Afghan intrusion ==
Between 1960 and 1961, thousands of Afghan troops disguised as local militias crossed the extremely porous Pakistan-Afghanistan border and entered the semi-autonomous Bajaur Agency of Pakistan, in an effort to annex the region. During this time, Afghanistan also deployed thousands of troops with tanks and artillery along the Afghanistan–Pakistan border, and frequently attacked Pakistani tribesmen and military forces from mountainous posts. Contrary to Afghan expectations, local tribesmen took up arms in support of Pakistani forces and inflicted heavy casualties on Afghan troops, ultimately pushing them back to the international border. The Pakistan Air Force subsequently crossed the Durand Line and bombed numerous Afghan military posts and encampments inside Afghanistan. Several Afghan troops inside Pakistani territory near the border surrendered, following which they were paraded on Pakistani national media which became an embarsment for Afghanistan internationally.


== References ==