American Reunion (also known as American Pie 4: Reunion or American Pie: Reunion in certain countries) is a 2012 American ensemble sex comedy film written and directed by Jon Hurwitz and Hayden Schlossberg. It is the fourth installment in the American Pie theatrical series. The film received mixed reviews from critics, and grossed $235 million worldwide.


== Plot ==
Thirteen years after their high school graduation, Jim Levenstein lives in the Chicago area with his wife Michelle and their two-year-old son, Chris "Oz" Ostreicher works as a sportscaster in Los Angeles with his unfaithful supermodel girlfriend Mia and is clearly unhappy, Kevin is married and works from home as an architect, Finch tells his friends that he has been traveling the world, and Steven Stifler works as an office temp for a verbally abusive boss.
Former classmate John, one half of the "MILF" duo, organizes a Class of 1999 high school reunion in East Great Falls, Michigan. Jim and Michelle return to Jim's childhood home, where he encounters his neighbor Kara, whom he used to babysit, and will soon turn 18. Jim meets Oz, Kevin, and Finch at a bar, where they meet Selena, Michelle's friend from band. Stifler appears unexpectedly. The next day, at the beach, Oz meets his high school girlfriend, Heather, who is dating a cardiologist named Ron and Kevin reconnects with high school sweetheart Vicky. Stifler destroys Kara's boyfriend's jet-ski much to the disapproval of the guys. That night, they stumble upon Kara's birthday party. Kara gets drunk; Jim drives her home, and she tries to seduce him. Kevin wakes up next to Vicky and assumes they had drunken sex.
Jim and Michelle attend a party hosted by Stifler and bring Jim's widower dad along; whom Stifler gets drunk. Kevin confronts Vicky who maintains they did not have sex. Mia takes ecstasy, and Ron humiliates Oz. Heather comforts Oz, and they reconcile before Mia and Heather get into a fight. Jim's dad meets Stifler's mom. Michelle, concerned about the recent lack of sex in their marriage, attempts to have BDSM sex with Jim but is interrupted by Kara. Her boyfriend arrives and a fight breaks out between his friends and Jim's friends. Jim tells Michelle he does not care about Kara. Upset, both Kara and Michelle leave. The police arrest Finch for stealing a motorcycle. Stifler is amused by Finch's arrest. Exasperated by his immaturity, the guys rally to Finch's side and admit that they dislike Stifler. Distraught, Stifler ends the party. The next morning, Jim's dad offers advice on how to fix the marriage.
At the reunion, Finch admits to being an assistant manager at Staples. The boys apologize to Stifler, and insist that high school would not have been fun without him. Stifler quits his job and the guys head to the reunion together. Kevin reconciles with Vicky. Finch makes amends for lying to Selena. Oz reunites with Heather after breaking up with Mia and Stifler punches Ron for threatening Oz. Jim reconciles with Michelle and Nadia interrupts them having sex but is pleased to see the couple is still together. Jessica reveals that she is a lesbian, and with Stifler's help, Sherman hooks up with Loni. Stifler is offered a job planning a wedding. Finch's mom makes a brazen sexual pass at Stifler and they proceed to have sex on the lacrosse field. John is reunited with his estranged buddy, Justin, and they watch Stifler having sex while shouting “MILF!” from the bleachers.
The next morning, Jim and Kara apologize to each other. Oz plans to stay in town with Heather, Finch plans a trip with Selena to Europe, and Stifler drops subtle hints about sleeping with Finch's mom. Kevin proposes a pact for them to reunite once a year.
In a mid-credits scene, Jim's dad gets fellatio from Stifler's mom in a movie theater.


== Cast ==


== Production ==


=== Development ===
In October 2008, Universal Pictures announced it was planning to produce a fourth theatrically released sequel to the first film. In April 2010, the film entered pre-production, with Jon Hurwitz and Hayden Schlossberg signing on to write and direct with plans to reunite the whole cast of the primary series.


=== Casting ===
In March 2011, it was announced that Jason Biggs, Seann William Scott and Eugene Levy had signed on to reprise their roles. Biggs and Scott were granted executive producer credits and also helped convince the other previous cast members to return. In April 2011, Alyson Hannigan, Chris Klein, and Mena Suvari signed on. The following month, Thomas Ian Nicholas, Tara Reid, Eddie Kaye Thomas, Shannon Elizabeth, and Jennifer Coolidge signed on. In June and July 2011, John Cho and Natasha Lyonne were the last returning cast to sign on.
On May 18, 2011, a casting call went out for the character "Kara", a role that involved "upper frontal nudity". Ali Cobrin was cast in the role. National Football League wide receiver Chad Ochocinco has a cameo.Jason Biggs and Seann William Scott each received a reported $5 million plus a percentage of the profits for their performances. Alyson Hannigan and Eugene Levy were said to have been paid $3 million each, with the rest of the cast receiving payments within the $500,000 to $700,000 range, except Tara Reid who was paid $250,000.


=== Filming ===
On a budget of $50 million, principal photography took place from early June to August 2011 in metro Atlanta, Georgia. In late June, filming took place at Conyers, Monroe and Woodruff Park. While in Conyers, filming took place at Heritage High School’s football stadium and band room. Production filmed at Newton High School in Covington from July 11 to July 15. Scenes were filmed at the school's gym for a reunion prom set, football field, commons area and hallways; which included 200 extras. Under the deal the production company paid $10,000 to the Newton County School System for using the school.During the last week of July, production moved to Cumming to film at Mary Alice Park on Lake Lanier and included about 100 extras. Moore said the beach at the lake looks similar to a Lake Michigan setting, which is the state in which the film is set. The production company paid $23,000 to have full access to the property for a week. Suvari finished filming her scenes on August 4.


== Release ==


=== Box office ===
American Reunion opened in North America on April 6, 2012 in 3,192 theaters for a weekend total of $21,514,080, putting it at number 2 at the box office behind The Hunger Games.
On its second week of release it dropped to number 5 at the box office with a weekend total of $10,473,810.The film earned $56,758,835 in North America and $177,978,063 internationally, for a worldwide total of $234,736,898.


=== Home video ===
The DVD and Blu-ray discs were released on July 10, 2012 in North America. The film was also released in a box set titled the "American Pie Quadrilogy" on August 22, 2012 in Australia. The R-rated version was available on iTunes a few days ahead of time, as an "Early Digital Release". It was released on September 10, 2012 in the United Kingdom.


== Reception ==
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film a holds an approval rating of 45% based on 183 reviews, with an average rating of 5.21/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "It'll provide sweetly nostalgic comfort food for fans of the franchise, but American Reunion fails to do anything truly new or interesting – or even very funny – with the characters." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 49 out of 100, based on 34 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale.According to Roger Ebert, who gave the film three out of four stars:
The charm of American Pie was the relative youth and naïveté of the characters. It was all happening for the first time, and they had the single-minded obsession with sex typical of many teenagers. American Reunion has a sense of déjà-vu, but it still delivers a lot of nice laughs. Most of them for me came thanks to Stifler... If you liked the earlier films, I suppose you gotta see this one. Otherwise, I dunno.
The Village Voice concludes its review with the following:
After some strained "Remember the time . . ." callbacks to 13-year-old gags, American Reunion gets comfortable and funny, as Hurwitz and Schlossberg hit familiar marks from unexpected angles, while the ensemble interplay is "routine" in the best sense of the word. Taken altogether, the Pie movies offer a cohesive worldview, showing each of life's stages as the setting for fresh-yet-familiar catastrophes, relieved by a belief in sex, however ridiculous it might look, as a restorative force. The recipe is so durable and the sustained character work so second-skin by now, one can imagine the Pie films keeping with the dramatis personae through middle age and into the problems of geriatric love, a raunch-comic version of Britain's documentary Up series. American Midlife Crisis? American Retirement? American Funeral? Let's go!
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave American Reunion a positive review of two and half stars out of four saying, "American Reunion reminds us what we liked about the original: the way the movie sweetened its raunch to build a rooting interest in these characters."


=== Accolades ===


== Soundtrack ==
The two score tracks were recorded by a 60-70 piece orchestra 
conducted by John Ashton Thomas who also orchestrated Workman's score 
for the orchestral sessions.
The orchestra was recorded at the Eastwood Scoring Stage at the 
Warner Bros. lot by Shawn Murphy who also mixed the score.


== Future ==
A fifth theatrical film, under the working title American Pie 5 was announced on August 4, 2012, with Hurwitz and Schlossberg returning as directors and screenwriters. In August 2017, Seann William Scott said in an interview that the fourth film probably had not made enough at the domestic box office to warrant another film. In August 2018, Tara Reid said she met with the directors, with them saying that the fifth film will happen, and that filming could begin soon.


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
American Reunion at IMDb
American Reunion at AllMovie
American Reunion at Box Office Mojo
American Reunion at Rotten Tomatoes
American Reunion at Metacritic