Blubberella is a 2011 German exploitation comedy film written and directed by Uwe Boll. 
The plot is about an obese dhampir superhero, set in German-occupied Europe. The entire film is a scene-for-scene spoof of BloodRayne: The Third Reich (directed by Boll himself the previous year) with most of the same cast and crew. The film received negative reviews.


== Plot ==
In the year 1940, Blubberella is an obese vampire/human hybrid with a hatred of Adolf Hitler, and a soft spot for food. She has been fighting the forces of evil for centuries when she comes face to face with the dictator who has plunged all of Europe straight into a hellish war. However, in the midst of sending Hitler to meet his maker, she instead accidentally grants him the gift of immortality. Now, Hitler is a supervillain with an army of undead Schutzstaffel (SS) officers to do his evil bidding. Destroying him won't be easy. But if there is one hero fat enough to defeat the fiercest army ever to walk the Earth, it is Blubberella.


== Cast ==


== Reception ==
The film received negative reviews.In an interview with Popzara's Brittany Vincent, Hollister said she took the role because of diminishing opportunity for large actresses to find work in Hollywood. "I've been doing this for ten years. While I've been extremely lucky to play some amazing characters, I’ve watched the roles dry up. And I’ve been shut out of even auditioning for many character roles because I'm too large."  On taking on the title role of Blubberella, she states "This movie would have been done with or without me. It would have been a lot more offensive if I hadn’t done it. But I didn’t win the war about the title. I hate the title." In an interview with Entertainment Weekly Hollister discussed the film and insisted her decision to take the role wasn’t based on money alone: "I'm not ashamed of Blubberella... Of course there's fat jokes in the film. If they had put another salami sandwich in my hand, I was going to start killing the crew. But I want people to know we weren't setting out to hate fat people. It's important for me that people know the true story." She went on to say, "This movie was made with the best intentions. I truly wanted to make a movie about a fat girl who could kick ass."


== References ==


== External links ==
Blubberella at IMDb
Blubberella at AllMovie
Blubberella at Rotten Tomatoes
Blubberella trailer on YouTube
Blubberella review