Diary of a Wimpy Kid: The Long Haul is a 2017 American live-action/animated road comedy film directed by David Bowers. It is the fourth installment in the Diary of a Wimpy Kid film series and the final one to be live-action. The film was based on the seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth books in the series, The Third Wheel (one element about Corny's Restaurant), Hard Luck (one element about Meemaw), The Long Haul (elements about a family's road trip) and Old School (one element about how Susan told Greg to stop using too much technology).
It is a soft reboot as the cast members from the first three films (Zachary Gordon, Robert Capron, and Devon Bostick) did not reprise their roles, and were replaced by a new cast. It was theatrically released on May 19, 2017, by 20th Century Fox. It received negative reviews from critics; the critical consensus on Rotten Tomatoes calls it "largely unfunny". It is also the last film in the series to be produced by 20th Century Fox until the studio was acquired by Disney in 2019 and the last one before the series was rebooted again under their name, with the next installment being a computer-animated film on Disney+. In particular, the hashtag #notmyrodrick became trending on social media when the trailer was released. It grossed $40 million worldwide on a $22 million production budget.


== Plot ==
One day while the Heffleys are dining at a family restaurant called Corny's with Greg's best friend, Rowley, joining them, Susan announces family plans to attend Meemaw's 90th birthday party, much to her family's dismay. Susan then tells Greg to rescue his younger brother, Manny, who became stuck inside a tube in the play area. Greg ends up in a ball pit with a diaper stuck on his hand. He subsequently becomes infamous after the people around him record him and post the footage on the Internet, leading him to be dubbed as an embarrassing meme known as "Diaper Hands". 
Later, Greg learns that the Player Expo is taking place not very far from Meemaw's house in Indianapolis. His favorite Internet star, Mac Digby, will be attending, and he hopes to meet him and get in one of his videos so he will gain popularity and put the Diaper Hands meme behind him. He acknowledges that he will have to somehow sneak off from the road trip and attend the Expo without Susan and Frank's knowledge, however. The Heffley family hits the road, where Greg, Rodrick and Frank's devices are immediately confiscated by Susan, who wants the road trip to be "absolutely technology-free".
After arriving at a motel, Greg secretly gets into the car, takes his phone out of the bag, and uses it. Later, when Greg and Rodrick are relaxing in a hot tub, Rodrick hears a notification from Greg's phone and discovers his plans to go to the Player Expo. Later that night, Greg is woken up twice by a loud noise. Upon seeing what it is, he encounters a couple of siblings playing with a cart by repeatedly wheeling it into a wall, belonging to a family whom he later dubs as "the Beardos" due to their father's large beard. Greg scolds them for crashing the cart repeatedly into the wall, waking him up, and eventually threatens to have them and their family kicked out. Their father, whom Greg later dubs as "Mr. Beardo", comes out, but nearly gets hit by the cart that Brandi Beardo, his daughter, deliberately rolls at Greg, but misses and the cart ends up damaging Mr. Beardo's van. Brandi puts the blame on Greg and lies to Mr. Beardo about Greg calling him a "Fat Beardo", and Mr. Beardo is about to punish him, but Greg escapes. Mr. Beardo then becomes bent on getting revenge on him.
On the road, the Heffleys attend a country fair where Manny wins a piglet. Mr. Beardo, who is also there with his family, notices Greg and begins chasing after him, on the warpath against him, but Greg manages to lose him on a spinning ride called Alien Abduction, where Rodrick vomits on Mr. Beardo after he crawled over him. The next day, a call from work leads to the Heffleys nearly getting in a car crash on a bridge, and the Heffleys, unable to take care of Piggy, drop it off at a petting zoo, much to Manny's dismay, but not before Greg reroutes the GPS to the Player Expo. In the hotel room, Greg and Rodrick tell Susan and Frank that they're buying a gift for Meemaw, but they actually sneak out to the Player Expo. Upon realizing that they are missing, Susan calls the police to look for them, but decides to go get them herself after seeing them on TV.
Greg sees Mac Digby participating in a video game competition and tells Rodrick to record him on the stage, but the attempt fails when he accidentally knocks out the power to Mac's screen and Susan arrives, revealing to everyone that he is Diaper Hands. She opens up to him and says that all she wanted was a nice road trip that would bring her family closer together, and she accuses him of not caring. He berates her that she doesn't care about his interests either, which is why he had to sneak out to the Player Expo in the first place. Having given up, she allows him to play on her phone. Back on the road, the tarp on their motorboat blows open and all of their belongings begin to fall out. The Beardos then show up and begin stealing them as "payback", including a suitcase containing a family memory book for Meemaw, causing Susan to break down in tears seeing the whole trip was a disaster.
The Heffleys chase after them, but get stuck in a long line of traffic, which Greg gets them out of with the aid of a flock of gulls. While taking a back road, they eventually find the Beardos' van at another motel where they get their belongings back, Greg escapes Mr. Beardo in the shower, and Mr. Beardo falls into a dumpster and becomes the new Diaper Hands himself. After reaching their destination, the Heffleys happily celebrate Meemaw's birthday with their other relatives. After the party, the car breaks down again as they drive back home. A tow truck driver stops by, but he only speaks Spanish. Manny tells the driver they need a lift in Spanish. Manny guides the driver to the petting zoo where he reunites with the pig. In the end, Frank is allowed time off from work to spend with his family, and Rodrick got money to repair his van. Greg says that while this vacation was far from perfect, it was certainly eventful and expresses excitement for where they'll be going next year, but Susan steps in to say they will be flying. In a mid-credit scene, two teenage girls take selfies with Greg, who they recognize as "diaper hands", much to Rodrick's jealousy.


== Cast ==
Jason Drucker as Greg Heffley
Alicia Silverstone as Susan Heffley
Tom Everett Scott as Frank Heffley
Charlie Wright as Rodrick Heffley
Owen Asztalos as Rowley Jefferson
Dylan and Wyatt Walters as Manny Heffley
Joshua Hoover as Mac Digby
Christopher A. Coppola as Mr. Beardo
Kimberli Lincoln as Mrs. Beardo
Mira Silverman as Brandi Beardo
Mimi Gould as Meemaw
Nathaniel Dickson as Brandon Beardo
Jake Strerner as Brent BeardoThe series' author, Jeff Kinney, makes his third cameo role, this time as a booth owner in the Player Expo.


== Production ==


=== Development ===
In 2012, the series' third entry, Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Dog Days was described as the last live action film in the franchise. In August 2012, while doing press for the film, author Jeff Kinney and actors Zachary Gordon and Robert Capron each indicated that there were no plans for a fourth movie, but did not dismiss the possibility entirely.Kinney replied to inquiries regarding the possibility of another sequel, stating, "At present, we don't have a fourth film in development, but you never know!" When describing the likelihood of starring in another film in the series, Gordon explained, "Dog Days most likely will be the last movie. The main problem is [the cast] is getting older. You can't stop it. There's no way to temporarily stop us from changing and growing up. You know, that's the problem because the characters are supposed to be timeless."In March 2013, Gordon stated in a Spreecast live stream that there would not be a fourth live action film. Previously, Kinney had indicated that instead of making a live action film, he would like to see Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Cabin Fever adapted into an animated film, stating in an interview, "I hope that it gets made into an animated movie. but I'd really like to see it turn into an animated television special."
In 2016, it was announced that a live-action film adaptation of the ninth book The Long Haul was in development, and would be featuring a completely new cast playing the Heffleys.
Lucas Cruikshank, best known for creating the YouTube series, Fred originally auditioned for the role of Mac Digby. However, he didn't read the script and had no idea of the role he was auditioning for outside of the fact that it was a YouTube role. Coincidently, Cruikshank previously auditioned for the role of Greg Heffley back in the first film.


== Release ==
The film was released on May 17, 2017, in the Philippines, two days later on May 19 in the United States, and one day later on May 20 in the United Kingdom.


=== Box office ===
The film grossed $20.7 million in the United States and Canada and $19.3 million in other countries for a worldwide total of $40.1 million, against a production budget of $22 million. It was the lowest-grossing film of the Diary of a Wimpy Kid series by a wide margin.In North America, the film was initially projected to gross around $12 million from 3,129 theaters during its opening weekend. However, after grossing $2 million on its first day, projections were lowered to $7 million. It ended up finishing with $7.1 million, placing 6th at the box office and marking the lowest opening of the franchise by a wide margin.When the film was released in the United Kingdom, it opened on #2, behind Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales with £1,444,092.


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 18% based on 71 reviews and an average rating of 4.09/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "With an all-new cast but the same juvenile humor, Diary of a Wimpy Kid: The Long Haul finds the franchise still stuck in arrested – and largely unfunny – development." On Metacritic, it has a score of 39 out of 100 based on 16 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave it an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale, down from the first three films' "A-".Dennis Harvey of Variety called the film "An amiable, fast-paced entry that should win over fans." Jesse Hassenger of The A.V. Club called the film "repetitive and uninspired". Christy Lemire of RogerEbert.com criticized it, saying it "Jettisons everything that’s honest and worthwhile about the books in favor of hackneyed misadventures and gross-out scatological humor." Jody Mitori of the St. Louis Post-Dispatch gave The Long Haul two stars out of four and commented on its increase of gross-out humor compared to the book version and previous films.


=== Home media ===
The film was released on Digital HD from Amazon Video and iTunes on August 1, 2017, and on Blu-ray and DVD on August 8, 2017, by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment. It grossed $2.6 million in home video sales.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Diary of a Wimpy Kid: The Long Haul at IMDb
Diary of a Wimpy Kid: The Long Haul at Rotten Tomatoes