Ferdinand  is a 2017 American computer-animated comedy adventure film produced by Blue Sky Studios and distributed by 20th Century Fox. The film was loosely based on Munro Leaf and Robert Lawson's 1936 children's book The Story of Ferdinand, written by Robert L. Baird, Tim Federle, and Brad Copeland, and directed by Carlos Saldanha. The film features an ensemble voice cast that includes John Cena, Kate McKinnon, Bobby Cannavale, Peyton Manning, Anthony Anderson, David Tennant, Tim Nordquist, Lily Day, Juanes, Jerrod Carmichael, Miguel Ángel Silvestre, Raúl Esparza, Gina Rodriguez, Daveed Diggs, Gabriel Iglesias, Flula Borg, Boris Kodjoe, and Sally Phillips. The music for the film was composed by John Powell, making it his eighth and final collaboration with Blue Sky before it shut down on April 7th, 2021. The story, written by Ron Burch, David Kidd, and Don Rhymer, follows a gentle pacifist bull named Ferdinand who refuses to participate in bullfighting but is forced back into the arena where his beliefs are challenged when he faces off against the world's greatest bullfighter.
Ferdinand premiered on December 10, 2017 in Los Angeles, and was theatrically released in the United States on December 15, 2017 in 3D and 2D formats and received mixed-to-positive reviews from critics and audiences. It grossed $296 million worldwide against a production budget of $111 million. Ferdinand received a nomination for Best Animated Feature at the 90th Academy Awards (losing against Coco) while also receiving nominations for Best Animated Feature Film (also lost against Coco) and Best Original Song ("Home") at the 75th Golden Globe Awards (losing against This Is Me).


== Plot ==
In Spain, young Ferdinand lives with other calves and bulls at Señor Moreno's "Casa del Toro", where bulls are trained for the bullfighting ring. Ferdinand is a pacifist, and is bullied by the other calves Valiente, Guapo, and Bones. A matador arrives, and the calves' fathers fight to impress him. Ferdinand's father Raf is picked, and Valiente squishes Ferdinand's favorite flower in retaliation. Raf does not come back from the ring; realizing his father is dead, Ferdinand runs away from Casa del Toro. He winds up on a flower farm owned by Juan and his daughter Nina, who adopt him, much to the annoyance of their dog Paco.
Some years later, Ferdinand has grown into an enormous but still-gentle bull. Juan determines that Ferdinand looks too intimidating to take along to the annual Flower Festival in Ronda, as in previous years. Ferdinand follows them anyway, but is stung by a bee and panics, accidentally destroying the town square. Animal Control officers deem him dangerous, and take him away before Nina and Juan can explain.
The officers decide to give Ferdinand to Casa del Toro, where he meets his old comrades Valiente, Bones, and Guapo, as well as new additions Lupe the goat, Angus the Highland bull, and lab-cloned Galloway Maquina. Ferdinand tries to escape, but is stopped by three German Andalusian horses, who now keep watch to prevent any more bulls from escaping.
Snooty matador El Primero arrives, needing a bull for his final bullfight before retirement. Moreno puts all the bulls in a ring to fight it out, but Ferdinand refuses to take part, causing a chain of mishaps when he tries to help Guapo recover from a stage-fright-induced faint. El Primero gives Moreno two days to get the bulls into shape. Guapo is sent to the chop house, and Valiente informs a horrified Ferdinand that non-fighters now become meat.
That night, Ferdinand comforts Bones as he grieves for Guapo, making a friend of him. The next day, he fixes Angus' hair so he can see better, earning another friend. Ferdinand, Bones, and Angus then challenge the horses to a dance off, and Maquina joins in the fun, helping them win. Valiente mocks them for bonding and wasting valuable practice time, causing the other bulls to sadly abandon Ferdinand.
With the help of hedgehogs Una, Dos, and Cuatro, Ferdinand and Lupe try to escape through the house. Ferdinand finds a wall of horns in a trophy room, including his father's horns. Realizing that the chosen bull inevitably dies in every bullfight, Ferdinand goes back and warns the others to run for their lives. Valiente refuses to accept the truth, and starts fighting Ferdinand, accidentally breaking off his own horn. He is taken to the chop house, and Ferdinand is chosen by El Primero for the bullfight.
Ferdinand breaks out and rescues Valiente, as well as Guapo, who had not yet been killed. Together, Lupe, the bulls and the hedgehogs steal Moreno's truck and flee to Madrid, pursued by Moreno's staff. They abandon the truck and flee on foot to the Atocha train station. Ferdinand helps the others get aboard the train, but deliberately sacrifices himself to buy them time to get away. He is captured and brought to the ring, but a video of the bulls' escape has made the news. Recognizing Ferdinand on TV, Paco alerts Juan and Nina, who hurry to Madrid to save Ferdinand.
In Las Ventas arena, Ferdinand refuses to fight, but becomes scared and starts running around in blind panic, accidentally knocking over and humiliating El Primero. Primero wounds him with a banderilla, and Ferdinand nearly retaliates until he sees a carnation crushed beneath his hoof. Unwilling to hurt anyone, Ferdinand spares El Primero and sits down, waiting to be killed. The crowd yells for Primero to let Ferdinand live, and he decides to put down his sword and leave with dignity. Ferdinand becomes the first bull to "win" a bullfight, and is reunited with Nina. Moreno then brings Lupe, Ferdinand and the rest of the bulls to Nina's farm, where they become a part of the family.
In a mid-credits scene, the hedgehogs are shocked to find their lost brother Tres.


== Voice cast ==
John Cena as Ferdinand the Bull, a huge flower-loving bull who does not want to fight and believes in looking out for others.Colin H. Murphy voices a calf Ferdinand.
Kate McKinnon as Lupe, an old goat and Ferdinand's self-appointed mentor.
Bobby Cannavale as Valiente, an arrogant and aggressive bull who bullies Ferdinand for his flower-loving personality and reluctance to fight. He was the last bull to befriend Ferdinand.
Jack Gore voices a calf Valiente.
Cannavale also voices Valiente's father, a ferocious and cruel bull who hates everyone, including his son. His attitude rubs off on Valiente.
Peyton Manning as Guapo, a brash, loudmouthed bull who has stage fright and is also bullied by Valiente. He is the fourth bull to befriend Ferdinand.  Jet Jurgensmeyer voices a calf Guapo
Anthony Anderson as Bones, an undersized but fast and agile bull. He is Guapo's friend, and the first of the bulls to befriend Ferdinand. Nile Diaz voices a calf Bones
David Tennant as Angus, a Highland bull from Scotland who had hair over his eyes until Ferdinand licked it. He is the second bull to befriend Ferdinand. 
Tim Nordquist as Maquina, a lab-cloned Belted Galloway, who cannot speak and only grunts and growls. He is the third bull to befriend Ferdinand.
Lily Day as Nina, the original owner of Paco and Ferdinand. She and her father later adopt Lupe, and all of Moreno's bulls.
Julia Scarpa Saldanha voices a young Nina.
Juanes as Juan, the father of Nina. 
Jerrod Carmichael as Paco, a dog owned by Nina and Juan
Miguel Ángel Silvestre as El Primero, a very picky matador.
Raúl Esparza as Moreno, the owner of Casa del Toro, who wants to impress Primero.
Gina Rodriguez as Una, a hedgehog who is Dos and Cuatro's sister.
Daveed Diggs as Dos, a hedgehog, Una and Cuatro's brother
Gabriel Iglesias as Cuatro, a hedgehog, Una and Dos' brother
Flula Borg as Hans, a horse at Casa del Toro.
Boris Kodjoe as Klaus, a horse at Casa del Toro.
Sally Phillips as Greta, a horse at Casa del Toro.
Jeremy Sisto as Raf, Ferdinand's father who died in the bullfights.
Cindy Slattery as Bunny, a red rabbit.


== Production ==
In 2011, it was reported that 20th Century Fox Animation had acquired the rights to the children's book The Story of Ferdinand by Munro Leaf to adapt it into a computer-animated feature film with Carlos Saldanha attached to direct it. In May 2013, Fox titled the film simply Ferdinand, which would be produced by Blue Sky Studios. John Powell, a frequent collaborator with Saldanha, would be composing the film's score. In November 2016, it was reported that Gabriel Iglesias would voice a character named Cuatro, a hedgehog, Una and Dos' brother.


== Soundtrack ==
On September 19, 2017, it was announced that singer Nick Jonas wrote and recorded a song called "Home" for the film. It was featured in the third trailer released the next day and also appears in the film and end credits. It was released as the first promotional single of the soundtrack on October 20, 2017. A second song by Jonas, "Watch Me", was used for the dance battle between the bulls and the horses, and was released alongside the film's EP on December 1.


=== Track listing ===
The soundtrack features three original tracks: "Home" and "Watch Me" by Nick Jonas, and "Lay Your Head On Me" by Juanes.
Most of Albert Hay Malotte's score from Walt Disney's Ferdinand the Bull (1938) was included and recomposed by John Powell, who also created additional original theme music for the 2017 film. It was the last time Powell composed a Blue Sky film before the studio shut down on April 7th, 2021.


== Release ==

In May 2013, Fox scheduled the film for April 7, 2017 release. In February 2016, the release date was pushed back from its original release date of April 7, 2017 to July 21, 2017. In August 2016, the release date was again pushed back, this time from July 21, 2017 to December 22, 2017, taking over the release date of DreamWorks Animation's The Croods 2, before that film was temporarily cancelled before film was back in production. In February 2017, the film was moved up by one week from December 22, 2017 to December 15, 2017. The first trailer premiered on March 28, 2017, followed by the second trailer on June 14, 2017.


=== Home media ===
Ferdinand was released on Digital HD on February 27, 2018, and was released on DVD and Blu-ray on March 13, 2018.
The film was made available for streaming on Disney+ on January 8, 2021.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Ferdinand has grossed $84.4 million in the United States and Canada, and $211.6 million in other countries, for a worldwide total of $296 million, against a production budget of $111 million.In the United States and Canada, Ferdinand was released alongside Star Wars: The Last Jedi, and was projected to gross $15–20 million from 3,621 theaters in its opening weekend. It made $350,000 from Thursday night previews at 2,385 theaters, which began at 5 P.M. and $3.6 million on its first day. It went on to open to $13.3 million, finishing second behind The Last Jedi.


=== Critical response ===
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 72% based on 120 reviews and an average rating of 6.30/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Ferdinand's colorful update on a classic tale doesn't go anywhere unexpected, but its timeless themes – and John Cena's engaging voice work in the title role – make for family-friendly fun." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 58 out of 100, based on 20 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audience polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale.Spanish bullfighting critic of El País, Antonio Lorca, in a critique of the film said that the film's message is "profoundly unnatural", and that the "renunciation" of the lead character to its "animal nature" is a lie that manipulates children, who will become "tomorrow's anti-bullfighters". El Diario.es commented on this article by Lorca, saying that it had been widely commented on social networks and that the anti-bullfighting narrative of the film "raised hackles" for its message against animal abuse, which can also be interpreted as "fight against school bullying" and "implicit defense of sexual and gender diversity". Ben Kenigsberg of The New York Times gave the film a positive review, saying, "Unlike in the book, Ferdinand earns the arena's cheers for not fighting, but the crowd's sense of surprise will elude audiences attending Ferdinand." Susan Wloszczyna of Rogerebert.com gave the film a three out of four stars and said, "Enough of that kind of bull. What the world needs now is Ferdinand, sweet Ferdinand, a rare breed of bovine who takes a stand against aggression, competitive rivalry and conforming to the expectations of others." James Dyer of Empire Magazine gave the film a three out of five stars, saying, "Inoffensive fun, but unlike its paperback forbear, the cinematic Ferdinand is unlikely to stand the test of time."Simran Hans of The Guardian gave the film a four out of five stars and said, "A flower-sniffing bull goes on a journey of self-discovery in this fun adaptation of a 30s children's book." Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter also gave a positive review for the film, saying, "It's no Coco, but Ferdinand, a CG-animated adaptation of the classic 1936 Munro Leaf and Robert Lawson book about a flower-loving bull who'd rather sniff than fight, manages to squeak by with enough charming set-pieces and amusing sight gags to compensate for a stalling storyline." Katie Welsh of Chicago Tribune gave the film a negative review of two stars, saying, "With a lovely voice performance from Cena, the spirit of Ferdinand does shine through. But the rest of the story filler is mostly forgettable." Tara Brady of The Irish Times also gave the film a three out of five stars, saying, "Ferdinand may lack the all-out charm offensive of the studio's 2015 Snoopy and Charlie Brown vehicle, but it's not too far off in terms of quality and sweetness."


=== Accolades ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Ferdinand at AllMovie 
Ferdinand at The Big Cartoon DataBase 
Ferdinand at IMDb