Flipped is a 2010 American romantic comedy-drama film co-written and directed by Rob Reiner, and based on Wendelin Van Draanen's 2001 novel of the same name. Starring Callan McAuliffe, Madeline Carroll, Rebecca De Mornay, Anthony Edwards, John Mahoney, Penelope Ann Miller, Aidan Quinn, and Kevin Weisman, the film tells the story of two eighth graders who start to have feelings for each other, despite being total opposites. Flipped was released in theaters in the United States on August 6, 2010 by Warner Bros. Pictures. It garnered mixed reviews from critics, and was a box office bomb, grossing $4.3 million against a $14 million budget.


== Plot ==
In 1957, second-grader Bryce Loski first moves in and meets Julianna "Juli" Baker. When they look into each other's eyes, Juli knows it’s love, but Bryce isn't so sure and tries to avoid her.
Four years later in 1961, Bryce tries to get rid of Juli by dating Sherry Stalls, whom Juli finds unreliable. However, his best friend Garrett takes an interest in Sherry and eventually tells her the truth about the advice, therefore not taking it too well. After Juli finds out they broke up, she thinks she could have him back, but they reconsider their own choices as time goes on.
Chet Duncan, Bryce's grandfather, moves in to live with the family. At one point, Juli falls in love with a large, old sycamore tree, but her relationship doesn't last long after the tree itself is cut down, much to her dismay. However, her father gives her a painting of the same kind of tree, causing her to overcome her distress. Juli is hurt when she finds out Bryce has been throwing away the eggs she offered, out of fear of salmonella. Chet helps Juli fix up her yard, while Bryce begins to develop feelings for Juli.
After Juli returns home from visiting her mentally-disabled uncle Daniel, she overhears Bryce supporting Garrett's badmouthing of her, causing her to stop having any interest in him. The Loskis invite the Bakers over for dinner and once arriving there, Juli confronts Bryce about what he did and eventually rejects him. After dinner, she apologizes for her behavior. Bryce has mixed feelings afterwards, since he isn't forgiven and she doesn't care enough to hold a grudge.
As the basket boy auction approaches, Juli finds out Sherry is planning to bid on Bryce. Bryce worries about what will happen in reality if Juli tries to start a bidding war with Sherry, but she bids on a boy named Eddie Trulock out of sympathy as nobody was bidding for him. However, during lunch, Bryce can’t seem to ignore Juli talking with Eddie, while he talks with Sherry. Much to his jealousy, he gets up out of his table and walks towards her, grabs her shoulders and tries to kiss her, causing her to dodge him off and leave in humiliation. Afterwards, Juli's feelings are hurt. Garrett and Bryce both end their friendship after a disagreement about Juli. Bryce tries to talk to Juli, but because of what he did, she refuses to do so.
Two days later, Bryce plants a sapling sycamore tree in Juli's front yard to show her how he feels. When she sees this, she goes out to help him and realizes that after all these years, they have never started talking with each other. As they plant the tree, they put their hands on each other, look into each other’s eyes, and share lovable smiles.


== Cast ==


== Reception ==
Flipped has received mixed reviews. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has garnered a 55% "rotten" or 5.99/10 rating based on 75 reviews. The consensus reads: "While not without its nostalgic charms, Rob Reiner's sometimes awkward adaptation of Wendelin Van Draanen's childhood novel doesn't reach the heights of the director's earlier work like Stand By Me." On Metacritic, the film holds a 45/100 rating, indicating "mixed or average reviews".


== Home media ==
Flipped was released on DVD and Blu-ray on November 23, 2010.


== Soundtrack ==
"Pretty Little Angel Eyes” – Curtis Lee
"One Fine Day" – The Chiffons
"He's So Fine" – The Chiffons
"Chantilly Lace" – Big Bopper
"There Goes My Baby" – The Drifters
"You've Really Got a Hold on Me" – The Miracles
"Devoted to You" – The Everly Brothers
"A Teenager in Love" – Dion and the Belmonts
"When" – The Kalin Twins
"Let It Be Me" – Phil Everly
"What's Your Name" – Rob Reiner, Michael Christopher Bolten, and Shane Harper [Org: Don & Juan]
"Flipped Suite" – Marc Shaiman


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Flipped at IMDb
Flipped at the TCM Movie Database
Flipped at Box Office Mojo
Flipped at Rotten Tomatoes
Flipped at Metacritic