Hot Pursuit is a 2015 American action comedy film directed by Anne Fletcher and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures. It was  written by David Feeney and John Quaintance. Its story follows a police officer assigned to protect the widow of a drug boss from corrupt cops and criminals who want her dead as they race through Texas to avoid detection. It stars Reese Witherspoon and Sofía Vergara.
The film was produced by New Line Cinema, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, and Pacific Standard and was released on May 8, 2015. It grossed $13.9 million during its opening weekend and $51.4 million worldwide, against a budget of $35 million. It received negative reviews from critics, and has a 7% approval rating based on 172 reviews on Rotten Tomatoes.


== Plot ==
Rose Cooper is a San Antonio Police Department officer whose work ethic is too intense. Following an incident in which the mayor's son yells "Shotgun!", setting him on fire by tasing him while he carried an alcoholic drink, Cooper's ineptness in the field has her assigned to the evidence locker.
Cooper's commanding officer, Captain Emmett, gives her a secret assignment to join Deputy US Marshal Jackson, protecting Felipe Riva and his wife Daniella. Riva must go to Dallas to testify against notorious cartel leader Vicente Cortez. At the Riva home, a pair of masked assassins and a different pair of assassins kill Jackson and Felipe while Cooper and Daniella are upstairs. Daniella grabs one suitcase, containing many pairs of shoes, and the ladies flee in Riva's car. When Daniella later tries to run off, Cooper handcuffs herself to her.
The ladies are found by Cooper's fellow officers Dixon and Hauser. When Cooper notices a tattoo that reveals the officers are one of the assassin teams, they escape and head for Dallas, where Daniella can testify against Cortez.
The ladies learn that Cooper is now labelled a fugitive, fleeing with Daniella. A truck plows into the car, spraying hidden cocaine everywhere. Cooper gets the truck driver to drop them at a clothing store, where Daniella and the very stoned Cooper change their clothing. When the pair of assassins show up, the ladies stow away in a trailer hooked to a pickup truck. When the truck stops, Cooper tries to steal it when the owner, Red, reappears with a gun. Cooper and Daniella flee, find another pickup truck, and drive away.
The ladies continue bonding, with Cooper admitting that her rigid and by-the-books nature has made it difficult to find a man. They are surprised to find a man named Randy sleeping in the back of the truck. Randy is a felon with an ankle bracelet due to viciously assaulting his sisters' abusive boyfriends. Cooper agrees to take off the bracelet in return for Randy's help. Daniella is pleased to see Randy flirting with Cooper.
Daniella explains that her bag of shoes which were thought to be studded with fake diamonds are in fact studded with $4 million in real diamonds, revealing Cortez's money laundering method. When Dixon and Hauser appear and shoot at the ladies, Randy attacks Hauser, allowing the ladies to run.
Cooper sneaks into Cortez's daughter's Quinceañera as a man to get close to Daniella, and tries to get her to wear a wire so that they can get Cortez to confess to her brother's murder, but a woman walking into the bathroom mistakes Cooper for a pervert and throws her out. She gets back into the party, running into Emmett and learning that he is working for Cortez. He pulls a gun on her, but Cooper pours alcohol on him and tases him so he catches fire.
Daniella corners Cortez and reveals her intentions to kill him. Cooper arrives and stops Daniella, but when Cortez draws a gun Cooper shoots him dead.
Three months later, Daniella is released from jail, and Cooper picks her up and transports her out.  She surprises Daniella with her old pairs of very valuable shoes.  She also reveals that Randy is in the car with her, and Daniella likes Cooper's new "wild side", as they drive off together.


== Cast ==
Reese Witherspoon as Officer Rose Cooper
Sofía Vergara as Daniella Riva
Matthew Del Negro as Detective Hauser
Michael Mosley as Detective Dixon
Robert Kazinsky as Randy
Richard T. Jones as U.S. Marshall Jackson
Benny Nieves as Jesus
Michael Ray Escamilla as Angel
Joaquín Cosío as Vicente Cortez
John Carroll Lynch as Captain Emmett
Jim Gaffigan as Red
Mike Birbiglia as Steve
Vincent Laresca as Felipe Riva
David Jensen as Wayne
Evaluna Montaner as Teresa Cortez


== Production ==
The film was originally titled Don't Mess with Texas. Principal photography began on May 12, 2014 in New Orleans, Louisiana, and was set to last for two months.


=== Marketing ===
The film's first trailer was released on February 12, 2015.


== Release ==
Hot Pursuit released in theaters on May 8, 2015. It was then released on Digital Download on July 28, 2015, and the DVD and Blu-ray were released on August 11, 2015.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Hot Pursuit grossed $34.6 million in the US and Canada, and $16.9 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $51.5 million.In its opening weekend, the film grossed $13.9 million, finishing second at the box office behind Avengers: Age of Ultron, which was in its second week ($77.7 million).


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 7% based on 172 reviews, with an average rating of 3.17/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Shrill and unfunny, Hot Pursuit bungles what should have been an easy opportunity to showcase Reese Witherspoon and Sofia Vergara's likable odd-couple chemistry." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 31 out of 100 based on 36 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a grade of "C+" on an A+ to F scale.Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave it 1 out of 4 stars and wrote: "It's all stupefyingly unfunny. Hot Pursuit is one hot mess."
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times called it "proof two females can make a bickering-opposites-action-comedy that’s just as lousy and sour as any clunker starring two guys."Stephanie Zacharek  of Village Voice gave the film a positive review, with particular praise for the editing: "Hot Pursuit is a quiet triumph of tone and timing. Nearly every scene is cut at just the right point, often topped off with a fantastic kicker of dialogue."


=== Accolades ===
Actresses received four nominations at the Teen Choice Awards for performances in this film.
Reese Witherspoon received two nominations, Choice Movie Actress: Comedy and Choice Movie: Hissy Fit.
Reese Witherspoon and Sofía Vergara also received two nominations as a pair, for Choice Movie: Chemistry and Choice Movie: Liplock.


== References ==


== External links ==
Hot Pursuit at IMDb
Hot Pursuit at Box Office Mojo
Hot Pursuit at Rotten Tomatoes
Hot Pursuit at Metacritic