Inside Out is a 2015 American computer-animated comedy film produced by Pixar Animation Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. Directed by Pete Docter and co-directed by Ronnie del Carmen, with a screenplay written by Docter, Meg LeFauve, and Josh Cooley, adapted from a story by Docter and del Carmen, it stars the voices of Amy Poehler, Phyllis Smith, Richard Kind, Lewis Black, Bill Hader, Mindy Kaling, Kaitlyn Dias, Diane Lane, and Kyle MacLachlan. The film is set in the mind of a young girl named Riley, where five personified emotions—Joy, Sadness, Anger, Fear, and Disgust—try to lead her through life as she and her parents adjust to their new surroundings after moving from Minnesota to San Francisco.
Docter began developing the project after noticing changes in his daughter's personality as she grew older. The film was first announced in 2011, and Del Carmen subsequently became co-director after working on the animated film Up (2009). The film's producers consulted numerous psychologists including Dacher Keltner from the University of California, Berkeley, who helped revise the story by emphasizing the neuropsychological findings that human emotions affect interpersonal relationships and can be significantly moderated by them. The film's official title was revealed in 2013, with Poehler, Black, Kaling, Hader, and Smith were subsequently announced as the cast that same year.
Inside Out premiered in Cannes on May 18, 2015, and was released in the United States on June 19, accompanied by the short film Lava (2014). The film received acclaim from critics and audiences, and grossed $857 million worldwide, making it the seventh-highest-grossing film of 2015. The film received numerous awards and nominations, including a BAFTA Award, Golden Globe Award, Critics' Choice Award, Annie Award, Satellite Award, and Academy Award for Best Animated Feature.


== Plot ==
Within the mind of a girl named Riley are the basic emotions that control her actions—Joy, Sadness, Fear, Disgust, and Anger. Her experiences become memories, stored as colored orbs, which are sent into long-term memory each night. Her five most important "core memories" power aspects of her personality which take the form of floating islands. Joy acts as the leader, and she and the rest of the emotions try to limit Sadness's influence.
At the age of 11, Riley moves to San Francisco for her father's new job. She at first has poor experiences; the new house is cramped and old, her father hardly has any time for her, a local pizza parlor only serves pizza topped with broccoli, and the moving van with their belongings ends up in Texas and will not arrive for weeks. On Riley's first day at her new school, Sadness retroactively turns joyous memories sad, which causes Riley to cry in front of her class and creates a sad core memory. Joy tries to dispose of it by using a vacuum tube but accidentally knocks the other core memories loose during a struggle with Sadness, disabling the personality islands. Joy, Sadness, and the core memories are sucked out of the Headquarters.
In Joy and Sadness's absence, Anger, Fear, and Disgust are left in control, with disastrous results, distancing Riley from her parents, friends, and hobbies. Because of this, her personality islands gradually crumble and fall into the "Memory Dump", where memories are forgotten. Finally, Anger inserts an idea into the console, prompting Riley to run away to Minnesota, believing it will restore her happiness.
While navigating the vast long-term memory area, Joy and Sadness encounter Bing Bong, Riley's childhood imaginary friend, who suggests riding the "train of thought" back to Headquarters. The three, after extreme inconvenience caused by the islands' dissolution, eventually catch the train but it halts when Riley falls asleep, then derails entirely with the collapse of another island. In desperation, Joy abandons Sadness and tries to ride a "recall tube" back to the Headquarters but the ground below the tube collapses, breaking and sending Joy and Bing Bong plunging into the Memory Dump. A crestfallen Joy discovers a sad memory that turned happy when Riley's parents and friends comforted her. Joy finally understands Sadness's purpose: alerting others when Riley is emotionally overwhelmed and needs help. Joy and Bing Bong try to use Bing Bong's old wagon rocket to escape the Memory Dump but are unable to fly high enough due to Bing Bong's weight. On their last attempt, Bing Bong jumps out to allow Joy to escape as he fades away.
Joy reunites with Sadness and they return to the Headquarters, but arrive too late as Anger's idea has disabled the console, rendering Riley apathetic. To the surprise of the others, Joy hands control of the console to Sadness, who is able to reactivate it and prompt Riley to return to her new home. As Sadness reinstalls the core memories, transforming them from happy to sad, Riley tearfully confesses to her parents that she misses her old life. Her parents comfort her and admit they also miss Minnesota. Joy and Sadness work the console together, creating a new core memory consisting of happiness and sadness; a new island forms, representing Riley's acceptance of her new life in San Francisco.
A year later, Riley has adapted to her new home, made new friends, and returned to her old hobbies while acquiring a few new ones. Inside the Headquarters, her emotions admire Riley's new personality islands, and all work together on a newly expanded console with room for them all.


== Voice cast ==


== Production ==


=== Development ===
The film was first announced in August 2011 at the D23 Expo. As a child, director Pete Docter's family relocated to Denmark so that his father could study the music of Carl Nielsen. While his sisters had an easy time adjusting to the new surroundings, Docter felt he was judged constantly by peers. While other kids were interested in sports, Docter sat alone drawing, a hobby that eventually led him to animation. His social anxiety ended by high school.

Docter noticed his pre-teen daughter, Elie, exhibiting similar shyness. "She started getting more quiet and reserved, and that, frankly, triggered a lot of my own insecurities and fears," he said. He imagined what happens in the human mind when emotions set in. The idea to depict it through animation excited Docter, who felt it the ideal form to portray "strong, opinionated, caricatured personalities". After working on the animated film Up, Docter invited Ronnie Del Carmen to become a co-director. Del Carmen asked Docter that "would like you to co-direct with me", and Del Carmen knew for the first time, who realized why he had been chosen by the director. Docter began researching information about the mind with Del Carmen and producer Jonas Rivera, and they consulted psychologist Paul Ekman and the University of California, Berkeley professor of psychology Dacher Keltner. Ekman had early in his career identified six core emotions—anger, fear, sadness, disgust, joy, and surprise. Docter found surprise and fear to be too similar, which left him with five emotions to build characters around. Other emotions considered for inclusion during the development process were schadenfreude, ennui, pride, and hope. Keltner focused on sadness being an emotion that strengthens relationships. Both emphasized how emotions organize social lives and the structuring of interpersonal interactions.The smash success of Docter's Up encouraged those at Pixar to allow Docter to create another film with a more sophisticated story. Inside Out is the first Pixar film without input from co-founder and former Apple CEO Steve Jobs, who died in 2011. In addition, the film did not have as much input from the chief creative officer John Lasseter, who has focused on restructuring Walt Disney Animation Studios in Burbank at the time of its production. Executives at Disney and Pixar were positive at the proposal of making Inside Out, but acknowledged it would be difficult to market. The film's title, Inside Out, was officially announced by Pixar in April 2013.


=== Story ===
Docter recruited a story crew to help develop the film's plotline. Although animation as an industry had been dominated by men, half of the story crew were women, in an attempt to have more diverse input. The choice to focus the film on a girl came from research that claimed that females age 11 to 17 are more attuned to expressions and emotions than others. The idea to have Riley play hockey came from Del Carmen, who observed that the sport is very popular in Minnesota. Initial ideas for the film found the main character, Riley, falling into a deep depression: Docter later felt they were inappropriate and scrapped them, although in the final film Riley does sink into a depression.The film was first storyboarded over a period of two to three years, all the while undergoing screenings for Pixar's "Brain Trust", a small group of creative leaders at Pixar who oversee development on all films. After multiple screenings and suggestions from other filmmakers, the picture was put into production. It was again evaluated three months into that process. Kevin Nolting, the editor of the film, estimated there were seven versions of Inside Out created before it even went into production. The story team attempted to create as much contrast with characters as possible. They found Joy the most complex character to write for, as she illustrates a broad range of "happy feelings". The earliest idea present in the final film is that Joy holds onto youth too long, setting about a "social storm" for Riley. It was not until several screenings later that they came upon the concept of moving to a new place, which created an external conflict that made the story easier to write. Initially, this crisis was to be set at a Thanksgiving Day pageant, in which Riley was hoping to be cast as its lead role, the turkey. Docter later deemed this idea too "bizarre" and it was replaced.Docter estimated it took four years of development for the film to achieve success in marrying the architecture of Riley's mind and her personal troubles. The concept of "personality islands" helped develop the film's emotional stakes, as they directly affect events inside her mind and in her life. In one draft, the characters fell into "Idea Fields", where they would "cultivate new ideas", much like a farmer would cultivate crop. The character of Bing Bong—a discarded old imaginary friend—came about in one draft of the film as part of a refugee camp inside Riley's mind. It was difficult to achieve the correct tone for the film; for example, viewers could not be distracted by Joy's nature or feel negative about the mess she helps steer Riley into. Rivera credited the casting of Amy Poehler, in addition to the idea of moving, with helping the film find the right tone.An early version of the film focused on Joy and Fear getting lost together, as it seemed to be the most humorous choice. By July 2012, the project was set for an evaluation screening with other Pixar filmmakers. Docter gradually began to feel that the story was not working, which made him think that he might get fired. He took a long walk one Sunday, where he began to consider himself a failure, and that he should resign from the film. While pondering what he would miss about Pixar, he concluded that he would miss his coworkers and friends most of all. He soon reached a breakthrough: that emotions are meant to connect people together, and that relationships are the most important things in life. He decided to replace Fear with Sadness, which he felt is crucial to renewal. He met with Rivera and Del Carmen that night to explain his change of plans, and to his surprise, they reacted positively to it. At the screening, he informed his superiors that new plans for the film were in order. Although it was a "scary moment", the film remained in production.Screenwriter Michael Arndt initially worked for a year on the film's script, calling it "both a brilliantly creative idea but also incredibly challenging", but left the project in early 2011, adding that "knowing the Pixar process, there may not be a single word [I wrote] that remains in the final script! They've had writers work on it since then." Josh Cooley and Meg LeFauve were credited as co-writers of the screenplay following their contributions during the rewrite. Like Docter, Cooley and LeFauve included experiences with raising their own children into the screenplay. Cooley said, "we treated the emotions like parents for Riley and because all of us in the writing room are parents ourselves, we just reflected on our own experiences as parents to create the characters." Despite his departure, Arndt received an "Additional Story Material" credit. Simon Rich also acted as a writer on the film.


=== Casting ===
The film's voice cast of emotions, Amy Poehler, Lewis Black, Mindy Kaling, Bill Hader, and Phyllis Smith, were first announced in August 2013. With the release of the film's first trailer in December 2014, it was revealed that Diane Lane and Kyle MacLachlan were cast in the film as Riley's parents.Hader was cast to voice Fear, a role that he felt he "weaseled" his way into by being a "huge fan" of Pixar's filmography. Hader toured the studio over a week, and also "helped out" in the story room. He was invited to play Fear by the end of his stay there, but was also asked to contact fellow Saturday Night Live (SNL) veteran Amy Poehler, whom the team viewed as perfect for the character of Joy. "They said: 'Would you mind calling Amy? We don't want to call her and have her think we're some weirdo,'" he recalled. He phoned Poehler and explained the story to her, noting that her role would be the driving force in the film. When the story was pitched to Kaling, she broke down in tears, explaining "I just think it's really beautiful that you guys are making a story that tells kids that it's difficult to grow up and it's OK to be sad about it."Smith was chosen by Rivera while he was watching Bad Teacher and saw her in a lunch scene. He called Docter and said "I think we found our Sadness." As the film contains several veterans of SNL, the film's team spent a week at that program for research on a live television sequence. Richard Kind was cast to voice Bing Bong, who tried to convey the same "sort of innocence" of his previous Pixar roles, and wound up not taking part in pre-release promotion as the producers decided to keep the character a secret.


=== Animation ===
The film's art design is intended to reflect 1950s Broadway musicals. Docter imagined that with emotions for characters, they could "push the level of caricature both in the design and in the style of movement to degrees [they'd] never done before". To this end, they emulated animators Tex Avery and Chuck Jones. Docter informed supervising animators Shawn Krause and Victor Navone to push the graphic caricature of each character rather than sticking to the rigid behavior of each RenderMan model. This required an artist to draw over characters in the film during dailies, using a Wacom Cintiq. One of the first scenes the team worked on was the dinnertime scene, in which viewers rapidly switch between the real world and Headquarters inside the family's minds.In envisaging how the mind's interior would be depicted, the filmmakers concentrated on the word "electrochemical"; production designer Ralph Eggleston explained, "It meant thinking of things as energy or energy-based, excitable." Each emotion has a glowing, "effervescent quality" to them, which were made out of energy and particles, and part of a "massive collection of energy" instead of "skin and solid" elements. The team worked for eight months on Joy's "sparkly" aura, but the team could not "afford" to work on it, which would affect the film's budget; however, Lasseter requested that it be applied for each emotion as Eggleston recalled, "You could hear the core technical staff just hitting the ground, the budget falling through the roof".The film is localized to accommodate international audiences: in the Japanese version, for example, Riley is disgusted by green bell peppers, rather than by broccoli, to reflect the fact that broccoli is generally less undesirable to Japanese children.


=== Music ===

Michael Giacchino composed the film's score. The producers first met with Giacchino to explain the film's concept and screen it for him. In response, he composed an eight-minute suite of music, unconnected to the film, based on his emotions viewing it. Rivera noted that while both Giacchino and Docter were musicians, they discussed the film in terms of story and character. Walt Disney Records released the soundtrack on June 16, 2015.
Track listing
All music is composed by Michael Giacchino.


== Marketing ==


=== Promotion ===
The marketing campaign for Inside Out began on October 2, 2014, when the teaser trailer for the film was released alongside the first theatrical release poster. Angie Han from /Film wrote that Inside Out's teaser trailer had a "nice reminder of how unique and inventive Pixar can be when it's at its best" as Pixar's future ideas have been ran out, which the film could be placed a spot on the 2015's list of "must-see" films. Joanna Robinson of Vanity Fair wrote that Inside Out's teaser trailer allowed Pixar's guide which targeted on "Herman's Head with Amy Poehler".On December 8, 2014, the first trailer of Inside Out was released. Germain Lussier of /Film acted Inside Out's first trailer as "the opposite", resulting the film would "actually happening"; while Phil De Semlyen of Empire describes the film's first trailer as "the high-concept conceit", avoiding the plot that was "darting around" it, with a full sequence to "help us wrap our minds around it." The second trailer for Inside Out was debuted on The Ellen Show on March 10, 2015. Angie Han of /Film wrote that Inside Out's second trailer allowed the crier viewer to "bring tissues" to the film.Television advertisements of Inside Out began airing on January 17, 2015. While Inside Out was ranked fourth on the "Top Movie Commercials by Weekly TV Spend", $22.8 million were spent on 58 versions of commercials aired 1,261 times on 34 networks overall as of June 17, mostly aired on Disney Channel and Disney XD, and most of the money going to NBC and ABC. With its following week to June 23 being its last time as one of the top five projects with the highest commercial spending, Inside Out topped at second place, and 73 commercials aired a total of 1,417 times on 35 networks, bringing the film's overall television advertisement spending to $28.9 million.


=== Video games ===
An Inside Out play set featuring all five emotions as playable characters was made available for Disney Infinity 3.0. The mobile Puzzle Bobble-style game, Inside Out: Thought Bubbles, was released on June 18, 2015, and the game is available on Apple App Store, Google Play, Amazon Appstore, Windows Store, and Windows Phone Store.


== Release ==


=== Theatrical ===
Inside Out premiered and screened out-of-competition at the 68th Cannes Film Festival on May 18, 2015. In the United States, Inside Out had its world premiere at the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles on June 8, and was released on June 19, in 3D; which accompanied the short animated film, Lava. Inside Out was originally scheduled to be released in the United States on May 30, 2014; however, it was pushed back to its current date as Pixar scheduled The Good Dinosaur (2015) for the original date instead.Inside Out was the first animated film to be released in Dolby Vision format in Dolby Cinema and the second for Disney following Tomorrowland (2015). Along with The Good Dinosaur, Inside Out was one of two feature films released by Pixar in the same calendar year, marking the first time in the company's history. Before Inside Out's release, the film underwent a test screening for children, since executives were concerned that it would be too complicated for younger viewers.


=== Home media ===
Inside Out was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on Blu-ray and DVD on November 3, 2015, while a digital release was released on October 13. These releases include behind-the-scenes featurettes, audio commentary, and deleted scenes; as well as Pixar's theatrical short, titled Lava; and the short film, which is set after the events of Inside Out, titled Riley's First Date? (2015). In its first week, Inside Out sold 802,344 DVDs and 1.2 million Blu-rays as the most sold film on both formats in the United States. That same week, Inside Out topped the Nielsen VideoScan First Alert chart, which tracks overall disc sales, as well as the dedicated Blu-ray sales chart with 57% of unit sales coming from Blu-ray. Overall, Inside Out sold 2.9 million DVDs and 2.6 million Blu-rays, adding them up to get a total of 5.5 million copies, and made $121.1 million through home media releases.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Inside Out grossed $356.9 million in the United States and Canada and $501.1 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $858 million, against a production budget of $175 million. Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $279.51 million, accounting for production budgets, P&A, talent participations, and other costs, with box office grosses, and ancillary revenues from home media, placing it sixth on their list of 2015's "Most Valuable Blockbusters".In the United States and Canada, Inside Out was released alongside Dope (2015) and was originally projected to gross $84–89 million from 3,946 theaters, with 3,100 of those in 3D by the week of its release. It grossed $3.7 million during its Thursday night showings, a record among Pixar films that had Thursday night showings, but behind Toy Story 3's (2010) $4 million midnight showing. In its opening day, the film earned $34.3 million, and through its opening weekend, it placed second with $90.4 million, behind the second-weekend gross of Jurassic World (2015) ($106.6 million). Inside Out was the first Pixar film not to debut at first; the biggest opening weekend that did not debut at first, surpassing the record of The Day After Tomorrow's (2004) $68.7 million; and the biggest opening for an original film, surpassing the record of Avatar's (2009) $77 million. The film's successful opening has been attributed to its Cannes premiere, CinemaCon press screening, its critical reception (particularly the 98% Rotten Tomatoes score), good word-of-mouth, Father's Day weekend, and a successful Tuesday-night Fathom screening. In its second weekend, the film fell by 42% to $52.3 million and still held the second spot. Inside Out reached first at the box office in its third weekend, which was Independence Day weekend, with $29.8 million, until the film was dethroned at third by Minions (2015) and Jurassic World in its fourth weekend, with Inside Out grossed $17.6 million during this weekend. In July 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic closing most theaters worldwide and limiting what films played, Inside Out returned to 442 theaters (mostly drive-ins) and grossed $340,000, the third-highest for the weekend behind The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Black Panther's (2018) re-releases.In other territories, the film earned an estimated $40.3 million on its opening weekend from 37 countries. Its largest openings were recorded in China ($11.7 million), the United Kingdom ($11.4 million), Mexico ($8.6 million), Russia and the CIS ($7.6 million), Italy ($7.4 million), Germany ($7.1 million), and South Korea ($5.2 million). In total earnings, its largest markets outside the United States and Canada are the United Kingdom ($59.4 million), Japan ($32.8 million), South Korea ($32.6 million), Germany ($31.6 million), and France ($30.1 million). It became the highest-grossing Disney animated or Pixar film of all time in Mexico (ahead of Frozen (2013)), the Philippines (ahead of Big Hero 6 (2014)), India, Ukraine, and Russia; where the film became the second-highest-grossing Disney or Pixar film and the first Pixar film to exceed one billion rubles.


=== Critical response ===
As of May 2021, The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 98% with an average score of 8.90/10 based on 374 reviews. The website's critical consensus reads, "Inventive, gorgeously animated, and powerfully moving, Inside Out is another outstanding addition to the Pixar library of modern animated classics." As of May 2021, Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 94 out of 100 based on 55 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale. Before the film's release, there was concern among the general public that Pixar films were declining in quality, with an over-reliance on sequels. Likewise, DreamWorks Animation was beginning to flounder in the early 2010s as several films performed below expectations at the box office, leading to speculation that the "genre" of computer animation was "in a funk". Inside Out has been hailed as a return to form for Pixar by numerous film critics.Following an advance screening at CinemaCon on April 22, 2015, the film was well received by audiences. Praise was aimed for its smart storyline, although some wondered whether the concept was too complicated for young audiences and to attract family crowds. After premiering at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival, the film attracted praise from film critics. Peter Debruge of Variety was effusive, called it the studio's "greatest idea" and "a stunningly original concept", as the people thought that "change[d] the way". The Chicago Tribune's Michael Phillips called it the studio's best since Up (also directed by Docter), a "consistently inventive and a heartening corrective to recent, stockholder-driven inferiorities". Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter deemed it an "audacious concept" that stands among the most "conceptually trippy films" for family audiences. Richard Lawson of Vanity Fair thought the film was likely to have adults make some gestures by "shed[ding] more" to it, because the film "might have some trouble" with children. The Guardian's Peter Bradshaw felt it "buoyant and sweet-natured", though slightly inferior to Pixar's best. Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club, while overall positive on the film, said it "trades the wordless gracefulness and sense of discovery of the animation studio's best work for explanatory voice-over and nonstop exposition", also arguing that the Pixar animators could have been more visually adventurous to match the conceptual ambition.Kristopher Tapley of Variety called it "one of the best films of the 21st century". A. O. Scott of The New York Times deemed the film "an absolute delight", reserving particular praise for its "defense of sorrow, an argument for the necessity of melancholy dressed in the bright colors of entertainment". The Washington Post's Ann Hornaday considered the film's role was transcended as "pure entertainment", becoming it as cathartic and therapeutic, while giving "a symbolic language" to children that managed "their unruliest emotions." Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times found it "bold, gorgeous, sweet, funny, [and] sometimes heartbreakingly sad", deeming it one of the best films of the year. Entertainment Weekly's Chris Nashawathy extolled it as "transcendent and touching [...] so smart and psychologically clever". Time's Mary Pols felt it a "nearly hallucinogenic, entirely beautiful" work that "defies the conventions of family movies". Christopher Orr of The Atlantic urged readers to view the picture, calling it "Pixar once again at the top of its game, telling the kind of thoughtful, moving meta-story it's hard to imagine being produced anywhere else". Wai Chee Dimock in the Los Angeles Review of Books compared the film to the work of neuroscientists Antonio Damasio, Dacher Keltner, and Oliver Sacks.


=== Accolades ===

Inside Out received fifteen Best Picture, twenty-one Best Original Screenplay, and forty Best Animated Feature nominations from over 50 different organizations and associations. It won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay at the 88th Academy Awards held in 2016. It received ten out of fourteen Annie Awards at the 43rd Annie Awards, including Outstanding Achievement in Directing in an Animated Feature Production for Docter, Outstanding Achievement in Voice Acting in an Animated Feature Production for Smith, and Best Animated Feature. The American Film Institute selected Inside Out as one of the Top Ten Films of the Year.The film received the Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film at the 73rd Golden Globe Awards. It received three Critics' Choice Movie Award nominations including the win for Best Animated Feature. The New York Film Critics Circle awarded Inside Out for Best Animated Film and it was named one of the Top 10 Films of the Year by the National Board of Review, while also winning the National Board of Review Award for Best Animated Film. The film was runner-up for Best Animated Film at Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards and at San Diego Film Critics Society Awards. It received four nominations from Satellite Awards including Best Original Screenplay, Best Animated or Mixed Media Feature, and Best Original Score. It took the Satellite Award for Best Animated or Mixed Media Feature. The film won the award for Best Animated Film at the 69th British Academy Film Awards in London, England, and was also nominated for Best Original Screenplay (losing to Spotlight). The film also received a Robert Award for Best American Film nomination and a David di Donatello for Best Foreign Film nomination, the Danish and Italian equivalent of the Academy Awards, respectively.In 2016, Inside Out was ranked at number 41 on BBC's 100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century list, a poll of 177 film critics from around the world. Inside Out was also named the "seventh-best film of the 21st century so far" in 2017 by The New York Times. Inside Out appeared on several lists of the best films of the 2010s in 2019, by outlets including: IndieWire, The A.V. Club, The Independent, RogerEbert.com, /Film, and Time Out London. Similarly, Inside Out has appeared on several lists of the best animated films, including: USA Today (2018), Rolling Stone (2019), and Esquire (2020).


== Possible sequel ==
In June 2015, Pete Docter said that there are no plans for a possible sequel and added that he wanted to improve more of the studio's "original fare", which he teased, "Never say never". In January 2016, Docter stated that a sequel is possible, and that he and Pixar will explore ideas. In a July 2016 interview, Pixar president Jim Morris said that while demand for a sequel is high, the company has committed its resources to several original movie concepts and that no sequels to any of Pixar's other films, including Inside Out, were being contemplated at that time.


== Lawsuit ==
In June 2017, Denise Daniels, a child psychologist from Minnesota, filed a lawsuit against Disney and Pixar for breach of contract. Daniels had been working on a creative project, The Moodsters, with a theme very similar to Inside Out and had discussed prospects of a TV production with Disney and Pixar executives, including with the film's eventual director Pete Docter. Daniels claims that she presented in detail her idea for "color-coded, anthropomorphic" characters represented different types of emotion, used as the children's learning tool for "better understand[ing]". The discussions were held between 2006 and 2009, and Daniels argued that they carried an implied contract for her to be compensated if the ideas were used by Disney. In January 2018, her suit was dismissed by judge Philip Gutierrez, who ruled that since Daniels had released materials related to the project publicly at the time of the conversations, there were no grounds for an implied contract between Disney and Daniels. Daniels appealed to the Ninth Circuit, who upheld the District Court's ruling in March 2020 that Pixar's film did not infringe on Daniels's characters. The decision stated that simply creating "color-coded" characters based on emotions was not enough to be copyrighted, but instead would have required these characters to carry similar characterization elements, as they had previously determined in DC Comics v. Towle in 2015.


== See also ==
Reason and Emotion
Osmosis Jones
The Numskulls


== References ==


== Further reading ==


== External links ==
Official website at Disney
Official website at Pixar
Inside Out Production Notes
Inside Out at IMDb
Inside Out at AllMovie 
Inside Out at the TCM Movie Database
Inside Out at The Big Cartoon DataBase
Inside Out at Disney A to Z