It's Kind of a Funny Story is a 2010 American comedy-drama film written and directed by Anna Boden and Ryan Fleck, an adaptation of Ned Vizzini's 2006 novel of the same name. The film stars Keir Gilchrist, Zach Galifianakis, Emma Roberts, and Viola Davis. It was released in the United States on October 8, 2010, and received generally positive reviews.


== Plot ==
After contemplating suicide by jumping off the Brooklyn Bridge, 16-year-old Craig Gilner decides to go to the hospital to seek help. Craig tells Dr. Mahmoud that he needs immediate help to which she registers him for a one-week stay on the hospital's psychiatric floor. 
Craig has a lot of pressure at his high school, Executive Pre-Professional (based on Manhattan's Stuyvesant High School). He is stressing over the need to turn in an application for a prestigious summer school, his shortcomings in the shadow of his best friend, Aaron, whom he considers to be great at everything, and his dad who pressures him to do well. At first, Craig is uncertain if he made the right choice to stay, mostly from fears his friends might find out when he misses school, especially Nia (his crush and Aaron's girlfriend). He is placed in the adult ward with a few other teenagers because the teenage ward is undergoing renovations.
Craig is introduced to Bobby, an adult patient who claims he is only there on vacation, as he takes Craig under his wing. During a group discussion, Craig learns that Bobby is stressed about an upcoming interview in hopes of moving to a group home. When Bobby states that all he will have to wear for the interview is the sweater that he is currently wearing, Craig offers him one of his dad's dress shirts to wear, and he accepts. 
Craig's kind offer to Bobby is witnessed by Noelle, another teenage patient who is in for self-harm. She is impressed by Craig and leaves him a note to meet with her that night. Together, they attend a painting session for patients. Craig paints a picture of an imaginary city map which he describes as "like my own brain".
Throughout his stay, Craig forms close bonds with various patients, including Bobby and Noelle. Bobby reveals to Craig that he is a father of a little girl and that he is actually in the ward for attempting to commit suicide six times. As Craig tries to help Bobby with his problems, Bobby, in return, helps Craig to gain the courage to ask out Noelle. 
One night, Nia suddenly stops by to visit Craig, revealing that she and Aaron have broken up. Craig asks Nia to his room, where she tries to seduce him. However, the two are caught by Craig's roommate Muqtada, an older patient who has not left the room during his stay. As Nia runs out, Craig chases her and calls out that he loves her, unaware that Noelle is standing behind him. Upset, Noelle storms off leaving behind a self-portrait that she had planned to give Craig.
Craig eventually wins Noelle's forgiveness, and the pair sneak out of the ward in scrubs and run around the hospital, ending up on the roof. There, while Craig is trying to finally work up the courage to ask her out, Noelle asks him, and then they kiss. Later, when Craig has an interview with the head physician, Dr. Minerva, he explains that he has realized that he wants to become an artist, and says he should be thankful that his problems aren't as bad as those of the others. 
That night, Craig arranges with one of the staff for a pizza party, promising to pay the cost, so the patients can say goodbye to him and Bobby, both of whom are being discharged the following day. He calls Aaron asking him to bring a record. When Aaron delivers the record, he tells Craig that he and Nia are working out their problems and they hug. At the party, Craig plays the record, of Egyptian music, bringing Muqtada out of his room. Craig tells Bobby that they should meet again after they are discharged, which Bobby considers, and thanks Craig for changing his outlook on life.
In the morning, Craig asks Smitty where Bobby is, but discovers Bobby had left earlier that morning. Craig is a little disappointed, but is happy that he and Bobby had left an impression on each other. After Craig leaves, it is shown that he starts dating Noelle, becomes better friends with Aaron and Nia (who are still together), begins pursuing his goal of becoming an artist and has broken the news to his dad that he is not going to follow his path, which his dad understands. The movie ends him saying that, while his stay didn't cure his condition, it helped him a lot, and he can get through the rest of his life with the help of his family and friends. The final scene shows how he goes on to live his life with his family, friends and Noelle. The film ends on a beautiful note where Craig shares his realisation.


== Cast ==


== Production ==

In May 2006, Paramount Pictures and MTV Films acquired the film rights to the novel. Anna Boden and Ryan Fleck were hired to adapt the screenplay. The film was later placed in turnaround and bought by Focus Features.Production began in New York City on November 30, 2009. Principal photography took about six weeks, ending on February 2, 2010. Scenes taking place in the fictional Executive Pre-Professional High School were shot at Poly Prep Country Day School in Brooklyn, while Woodhull Medical Center in Brooklyn stood in for Argenon Hospital.As of May 13, 2010, the film completed editing. Canadian indie rock band Broken Social Scene worked on the score for the film.


== Release ==
The film was originally scheduled for a limited release in the United States on September 24, 2010. Focus Features later opted for a wide release of approximately 500 theaters across the US and a release date of October 8, 2010. The film premiered at the 2010 Toronto International Film Festival.To coincide with the film's release, Hyperion Books published a new edition of the novel, featuring photos from the film on the cover.The film aired on HBO cable in the summer of 2011.


== Critical response ==
As of January 2020, the film holds a 57% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 136 reviews with an average rating of 6.00/10. The critics consensus states "It's amiable, and it does a surprisingly good job of sidestepping psych ward comedy clichés, but given its talented cast and directors, It's Kind of a Funny Story should be more than just mildly entertaining." On Metacritic, the film has an average score of 63, based on 33 reviews, which indicates "Generally favorable reviews".Justin Chang of Variety wrote: "The filmmakers fully retain their offbeat sensibility and attentiveness to character while providing perhaps the sharpest showcase yet for Zach Galifianakis' outsized talents."
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote: "I don't blame you for backing off a movie that focuses on a suicidal teen who learns warm life lessons by spending five days in a Brooklyn hospital's psych ward. Stop worrying. It's Kind of a Funny Story, based on Ned Vizzini's semiautobiographical novel, breaks the jinx."Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter called it "A dramatically inert, lethargic dramedy that isn't nearly as quirky and poignant is it perceives itself." Ann Hornaday of the Washington Post gave the film a negative review saying "There's very little that's even kind of funny in It's Kind of a Funny Story, which can't accurately be described as a comedy but isn't a true drama, either."


== Home media ==
It's Kind of a Funny Story was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc on February 8, 2011.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
It's Kind of a Funny Story at IMDb
It's Kind of a Funny Story at Box Office Mojo