Quo vado? is a 2016 Italian comedy film directed by Gennaro Nunziante. It was released on January 1, 2016. The film is the highest-grossing Italian film in Italy.


== Plot ==
Checco was born into a life of relative comfort and privilege among his peers in his small town in southern Italy. He is one of the lucky few to have a posto fisso, or guaranteed job as a public servant. When a new reformist government vows to cut down on bureaucracy, Checco is forced to accept ever-worsening public-sector postings in order to maintain his guaranteed pay, benefits, and lifetime employment. Dr. Sironi, a representative of the new government, is tasked with downsizing the public sector by offering buyouts to targeted government employees in exchange for their resignation (see constructive dismissal). She takes a special interest in Checco who eventually becomes the last resilient holdout; no matter what hellish place he is appointed to, he finds rays of hope and won't surrender his public employee status.
In a final attempt to erode his willpower, Sironi appoints him to the Italian arctic research station as a hunter to protect the team. Checco initially wants to resign, but changes his decision when he falls in love with Valeria, a coworker. During vacation Checco, visits Valeria where she lives in Norway and finds out that she has three children. He is also introduced to a whole new way of life. He becomes enchanted with the politeness and the aspects of progressive, eco-centric society. However, he finds Norway's winter season depressing; he becomes home sick and misses Italian cuisine and culture. Checco and Valeria manage to move to Italy. Checco seems happy with his new job, but Valeria fails to adjust to the demanding living situation which requires compromises and bribery. Fed up, Valeria leaves Italy and Checco gets his permanent position back in his hometown. Later he receives news that Valeria is pregnant with his child in South Africa. Checco goes to South Africa, but Valeria is displeased with Checco's decision to juggle both the responsibilities of fatherhood and the “posto fisso”. Checco chooses to let go of his secure job, uses the money from Sironi to buy vaccines for an African medical camp and restarts his life as Valeria's helper.


== Cast ==
Checco Zalone as Checco Zalone
Federico Ielapi as Checco Zalone (child)
Eleonora Giovanardi as Valeria
Ninni Bruschetta as Minister Magno
Sonia Bergamasco as Dr. Sironi
Maurizio Micheli as Peppino, Checco's father
Paolo Pierobon as Ricercatore scientifico
Lino Banfi as Senator Nicola Binetto
Ludovica Modugno as Caterina


== Release ==
Quo Vado? was released in Italy on January 1, 2016, by Medusa Distribuzione.
The film was released in the United Kingdom by Vue Cinemas on April 22, 2016, and in Australia and New Zealand by Palace Films as Where am I Going? on October 13, 2016.


== Reception ==
The film grossed $75.8 million worldwide. It opened with a record €22.2 million, and grossed €65.3 million becoming and currently the highest grossing Italian film in Italy, surpassing the record set by Zalone and Nunziante's 2013 film, Sole a catinelle.Its largest markets outside Italy were Spain ($2.9 million, becoming the third highest-grossing opening), Australia ($545,966), Argentina ($256,856), Uruguay ($120,804), Portugal ($85,961) and Russia ($76,555).


== References ==


== External links ==
Quo Vado? at IMDb
Quo vado? at Rotten Tomatoes