Shrek Forever After (previously promoted as Shrek Goes Fourth and Shrek: The Final Chapter) is a 2010 American computer-animated comedy film loosely based on the 1990 picture book Shrek! by William Steig. Produced by DreamWorks Animation and distributed by Paramount Pictures, it is the fourth installment in the Shrek film franchise and the sequel to Shrek the Third (2007). The film was directed by Mike Mitchell and written by Josh Klausner and Darren Lemke. It stars Mike Myers, Eddie Murphy, Cameron Diaz, Antonio Banderas, Julie Andrews, and John Cleese reprising their previous roles, with Walt Dohrn introduced in the role of Rumpelstiltskin. The plot follows Shrek struggling as a family man with no privacy, who yearns for the days when he was once feared. He is tricked by Rumpelstiltskin into signing a contract that leads to disastrous consequences.
The film premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival on April 21, 2010, and was theatrically released in the United States on May 21, 2010 in 2D, 3D, and IMAX 3D formats. The film debuted as the top-grossing film at the box office, a position it held for three consecutive weeks in the United States and Canada. It received mixed reviews from critics, but grossed a worldwide total of $752 million and becoming the fifth-highest-grossing film of 2010. In addition, Shrek Forever After became DreamWorks Animation's second-highest-grossing film at the foreign box office. Although originally marketed as the final installment in the film franchise, a fifth Shrek film has been reported to be in production in the years since Forever After was released.


== Plot ==
In a flashback, King Harold and Queen Lillian are about to sign the kingdom of Far Far Away over to Rumpelstiltskin ("Rumpel"), in exchange for lifting their daughter Princess Fiona's curse. The deal is canceled at the last second when the king and queen are informed that Fiona has been rescued. In the present time, an angry Rumpel laments his loss and wishes that Fiona's rescuer, Shrek, had never been born.
Meanwhile, Shrek has grown steadily weary of being a family man and celebrity among the villagers, leading him to long for his past when he was feared and had privacy. When celebrating his children's first birthday at a restaurant in Far Far Away, an escalating series of mishaps further injure his ego, causing him to walk out in anger and lash out at Fiona. Having observed the outburst, Rumpel follows Shrek and arranges for him to appear to save his life. Inside Rumpel's carriage, Shrek laments that he is no longer a "real ogre". Pretending to thank Shrek for his good deed earlier, Rumpel offers Shrek a deal: A day as a "real ogre" in exchange for a day from his childhood. Shrek signs the contract and is whisked away into an alternate reality.
Now feared by the villagers, Shrek takes the opportunity to cause some lighthearted mischief until he finds that Fiona is a fugitive and his home deserted and desolate. Captured by witches, Shrek is taken to Rumpel, now the king of the derelict Far Far Away. Rumpel reveals to Shrek that he erased the day he was born, meaning Shrek never existed in this alternate timeline. Consequently, Harold and Lillian were forced to sign the kingdom over to Rumpel, causing them to disappear. When the day ends, Shrek will no longer exist.
Shrek escapes Rumpel's castle with Donkey. Initially terrified of Shrek, Donkey befriends him after seeing him cry over his erased history. Donkey helps Shrek find a hidden exit clause; the contract can be nullified by "true love's kiss". The pair soon encounter a still-cursed Fiona leading an army of ogres in a resistance against Rumpel, and a lazy and overweight Puss in Boots being kept as Fiona's pet. Shrek tries to win over Fiona, but she has become disillusioned about the power of true love when no one rescued her and is too busy preparing for an ambush on Rumpel. While sparring with Shrek, Fiona begins to take a liking to him, but they stop short of kissing. Puss encourages Shrek to continue pursuing Fiona.
During the ambush, the ogres are captured by the Pied Piper, but Shrek and Fiona escape with the help of Puss and Donkey. Shrek insists that Fiona kiss him, assuring her that it will fix everything; she reluctantly obliges, but nothing happens since she is not in love. Rumpel offers a wish to the one who brings him Shrek, and after hearing this, Shrek turns himself in. Rumpel is forced to grant the wish to Shrek, and he uses it to free the other ogres. As he's locked up, Rumpel reveals that Fiona has been captured and not released, since she is not "all ogre". Donkey, Puss, and the freed ogres form a plan to storm the castle. They capture Rumpel and defeat his witch army, and Shrek and Fiona take down Dragon.
As the sun rises, Shrek begins to fade from existence. Having fallen in love with him, Fiona kisses Shrek just before he disappears. Seeing that she is still an ogre in the sunlight, Fiona realizes her curse was broken and that she has assumed "love's true form". The alternate reality disintegrates, and everyone disappears. Shrek and Rumpel are transported back to the original timeline before Shrek lost his temper at the party. Instead of lashing out, he embraces his family and friends with a newfound appreciation for them.


== Voice cast ==

Mike Myers as Shrek
Eddie Murphy as Donkey
Cameron Diaz as Princess Fiona
Antonio Banderas as Puss in Boots
Julie Andrews as Queen Lillian
John Cleese as King Harold
Walt Dohrn as Rumpelstiltskin
Jon Hamm as Brogan the Ogre
Jane Lynch as Gretched the Ogre
Craig Robinson as Cookie the Ogre
Lake Bell as Patrol Witch, Wagon Witch No. 2
Kathy Griffin as Dancing Witch and Wagon Witch No. 1
Mary Kay Place as Guard Witch
Kristen Schaal as Pumpkin Witch, Palace Witch
Conrad Vernon as Gingerbread Man
Aron Warner as Wolf
Christopher Knights as Blind Mice
Cody Cameron as Pinocchio, Three Pigs
Dante James Hauser as Fergus
Chris Miller as Magic Mirror, Geppetto
Frank Welker as Dragon
Meredith Vieira as Broomsy Witch
Jeremy Steig as Pied Piper
Larry King as Doris the Ugly Stepsister
Regis Philbin as Mabel the Ugly Stepsister
Mike Mitchell as Witch Guard No. 2 and Butter Pants
Ryan Seacrest as Father of Butter Pants


== Production ==
Following the success of Shrek 2, a third and fourth Shrek film, along with plans for a fifth and final film, were announced in May 2004 by Jeffrey Katzenberg. In October 2006, DreamWorks Animation revealed that the fourth film would be released in 2010.In October 2007, Katzenberg announced a title for the fourth film, Shrek Goes Fourth, explaining that "Shrek goes out into the world, forth!" In May 2009, however, DreamWorks Animation retitled the film to Shrek Forever After, indicating that it would be the last in the Shrek series. In November 2009, Bill Damaschke, head of creative production at DreamWorks Animation, confirmed with "All that was loved about Shrek in the first film is brought to the final film."Tim Sullivan was hired to write the script in March 2005, but was later replaced by Darren Lemke and Josh Klausner. Klausner, about the script's evolution, said, "When I first came onto the project, it wasn't supposed to be the final chapter—there were originally going to be 5 Shrek movies. Then, about a year into the development, Jeffrey Katzenberg decided that the story that we'd come up with was the right way for Shrek's journey to end, which was incredibly flattering." In May 2007, shortly before the release of the third film, it was announced Mike Mitchell would be on board to direct the new installment. Much of the film was written and recorded in New York City.


== Soundtrack ==

Like the other Shrek films, the film's original score was composed by British composer Harry Gregson-Williams.


== Release ==
Shrek Forever After premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival on April 21, 2010. It was publicly released on May 20, 2010, in Russia, while the American release followed the next day. The film was also released in IMAX 3D format. In July 2014, the film's distribution rights were purchased by DreamWorks Animation from Paramount Pictures and transferred to 20th Century Fox before reverting to Universal Pictures in 2018.


=== Box office ===
Shrek Forever After earned $238.7 million in North America, and $513.9 million in other countries, for a worldwide total of $752.6 million. This made it the 12th-highest-grossing animated film, the fifth-highest-grossing of 2010, the second-highest-grossing animated film of 2010 (behind Toy Story 3) and the second-lowest-grossing film of the Shrek series.Shrek Forever After had the widest release for an animated film (4,359 theaters, later expanded to 4,386) in North America. On its opening day (May 21, 2010), it ranked No.1, grossing $20.8 million, which was lower than the opening days of the last two Shrek films. The film then opened in three days with $70.8 million, lower than box office analysts' predictions of an opening of $105 million and also lower than the two previous films of the franchise. Anne Globe, head of worldwide marketing for DreamWorks Animation, said they were "happy with the film's opening" since it debuted at No. 1 and also had the fourth-best opening for an animated film, at the time, in the United States and Canada. Shrek Forever After was No.1 for three consecutive weekends.In North America, it was the eighth-highest-grossing film of 2010, the fourth-highest-grossing DreamWorks Animation film, 2010's third-highest-grossing animated film, trailing Toy Story 3 and Despicable Me and the lowest-grossing Shrek film. Executives at DreamWorks Animation were impressed because the film earned $238.7 million in North America, although it was the fourth film in the series, seemingly being outgrown by its fans.Outside North America, it is the highest-grossing Shrek film, DreamWorks Animation's second-biggest hit (behind Madagascar 3: Europe's Most Wanted) and the seventh-highest-grossing animated film. It topped the weekend box office once on July 16–18, 2010 with $46.3 million. In Russia and CIS, its second-highest-grossing country, it had a $19.7 million opening weekend which was a record among animated films. It earned $51.4 million in total. Third in total earnings came the United Kingdom, Ireland and Malta, where it opened with £8.96 million ($13.6 million) and finished its box office run with £31.1 million ($51.1 million).


=== Critical response ===
As of October 2020, on review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, Shrek Forever After had an approval rating of 58% based on 199 reviews and an average rating of 5.90/10. The site's critical consensus read, "While not without its moments, Shrek Forever After too often feels like a rote rehashing of the franchise's earlier entries." As of October 2020, on Metacritic, the film had a weighted average score of 58 out of 100, based on 35 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, the same score earned by Shrek and Shrek 2.Stephen Holden of The New York Times stated "What fortifies “Shrek Forever After” are its brilliantly realized principal characters, who nearly a decade after the first “Shrek” film remain as vital and engaging fusions of image, personality and voice as any characters in the history of animation." Pete Hammond of BoxOffice gave the film 4.5 stars out of 5 and wrote, "Hilarious and heartfelt from start to finish, this is the best Shrek of them all, and that's no fairy tale. Borrowing liberally from Frank Capra's It's a Wonderful Life, this edition blends big laughs and emotion to explore what Far Far Away might have been like if Shrek never existed." James Berardinelli of Reelviews awarded the film three out of four stars and wrote, "Even though Shrek Forever After is obligatory and unnecessary, it's better than Shrek the Third and it's likely that most who attend as a way of saying goodbye to the Jolly Green Ogre will not find themselves wishing they had sought out a more profitable way of spending 90-odd minutes."James White of Empire gave the film four out of four stars, saying, "DreamWorks could be entering a period of fresh creativity. With How To Train Your Dragon and a balanced, darker-hued and very funny Shrek finale, they've found the magic again." Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a "B−" grade, saying "Everyone involved fulfills his or her job requirements adequately. But the magic is gone and Shrek Forever After is no longer an ogre phenomenon to reckon with." Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote "It's a fun ride. What's missing is the excitement of a new interpretation." Mary Pols of Time stated in her review "Can an ogre jump a shark? I think so." Giving the film one star out of four, Kyle Smith of the New York Post wrote, "After the frantic spurt of fairy-tale allusions and jokes in the first three Shreks, this one inches along with a few mostly pointless action scenes and the occasional mild pun."


=== Accolades ===


=== Home media ===
Shrek Forever After (marketed as Shrek Forever After: The Final Chapter) was released on DVD and Blu-ray on December 7, 2010. As of April 24, 2011, the movie has made $75 million in DVD and Blu-ray sales. The film is also included in Shrek: The Whole Story, a box set released on the same day that included all four Shrek movies and additional bonus content. As of May 2012, 10.0 million home entertainment units were sold worldwide.


== Video game ==

Shrek Forever After is an action-adventure video game based on the movie of the same name. It was released by Activision on May 18, 2010.


== Possible sequel ==

In 2014, a Fox Business Network interview with Dreamworks CEO Jeffrey Katzenberg implied that more Shrek films would eventually be made saying, "But I think you can be confident that we'll have another chapter in the Shrek series. We're not finished and, more importantly, neither is he." Following NBCUniversal acquisition of DreamWorks Animation by NBCUniversal in 2016, President and CEO Steve Burke discussed plans to revive the franchise. In July 2016, The Hollywood Reporter cited sources saying that a fifth film was planned for a 2019 release. By late 2016, reports surfaced that the script had been completed.


== Spin-off ==

Puss in Boots is a computer-animated adventure comedy film that was released on October 28, 2011. The movie is based on and follows the character of the same name on his adventures with Kitty Softpaws and mastermind Humpty Dumpty before his first appearance in Shrek 2.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Shrek Forever After at AllMovie 
Shrek Forever After at the American Film Institute Catalog 
Shrek Forever After at The Big Cartoon DataBase
Shrek Forever After at IMDb 
Shrek Forever After at the TCM Movie Database