The Other Woman is a 2014 American comedy film directed by Nick Cassavetes and written by Melissa Stack. The film stars Cameron Diaz, Leslie Mann and Kate Upton. Nikolaj Coster-Waldau, Nicki Minaj and Taylor Kinney appear in supporting roles. The film follows three women—Carly (Diaz), Kate (Mann), and Amber (Upton)—who are all romantically involved with the same man, Mark (Coster-Waldau). After finding out about each other, the trio take revenge on Mark.
Development of The Other Woman began in January 2012, when 20th Century Fox hired Stack to write the script, based on the original idea from 1996 comedy The First Wives Club. Casting was done between November 2012 and June 2013. Filming began on April 29, 2013, in locations including Manhattan, Long Island, the Hamptons, Dockers Waterside Restaurant on Dune Road in Quogue, and the Bahamas, and it concluded on August 27 that year. Aaron Zigman composed the score and LBI Productions produced the film. The film was released on April 25, 2014, in the United States, and distributed worldwide by 20th Century Fox. The film received mostly negative reviews from critics, but was a box office success, grossing $196.7 million worldwide.


== Plot ==
Carly Whitten (Cameron Diaz), a New York attorney, has started a relationship with Mark King (Nikolaj Coster-Waldau), a handsome and charismatic businessman, whom she has been having sex with for eight weeks. Carly, planning to introduce Mark to her father, Frank (Don Johnson), is upset that Mark has to go out of town on account of a "flood" at his Connecticut home, missing their dinner. However, her father encourages her to go to his house anyway. So, Carly dresses up in a sexy plumber's outfit and heads to Mark's house to seduce him. However, she is horrified to be met at the door by Mark's wife, Kate (Leslie Mann), whom she had originally assumed to be Mark's housekeeper. Thrown for a loop by this revelation, Carly accidentally breaks one of Kate's garden urns, making up a weak excuse as to why she is there, and staggers home, embarrassed and in shock.  
The next day, Kate shows up at Carly's law firm, having found her contact details in Mark's phone book. Carly informs her that Mark has been cheating on both of them but promises the panicked Kate she had no idea Mark was married. Initially annoyed by Kate's constant presence at her apartment or work, Carly begins to warm to her after a wild sleepover and a boozy heart-to-heart. Kate then discovers that Mark is still seeing another woman, who she thinks is Carly secretly continuing her previous relationship with Mark. She confronts Carly about this and the two argue before realizing that Mark is seeing a third woman as both Carly and Kate have been refusing sex with him. 
Carly and Kate follow Mark to the Hamptons, where they stay at the house of Kate's brother, Phil (Taylor Kinney), who is immediately attracted to Carly. The duo spies on Mark and find him with his mistress Amber, (Kate Upton), a beautiful 22-year-old, on the beach, and when Mark leaves for the gym, the two women inform Amber that Mark has been cheating on all of them.
All three women decide to take revenge on him together. Kate spikes his smoothies with estrogen pills to swell his nipples, has their dog lick his toothbrush before soaking it in their toilet, and adds hair-removal cream into his shampoo. Carly spikes his water with a laxative to cause him to defecate heavy diarrhea. Amber uses an ugly drag queen sexual partner against him.
In the course of carrying out the women's vicious pranks, they also discover that Mark has been embezzling money from various startup companies that his workplace helps develop. Meanwhile, Carly begins to connect romantically and feel a bond with Phil. The women's camaraderie begins to fall apart when Kate finds herself still in love with Mark after caving and having sex with him. Carly exposes Mark's fraud before texting him, upsetting Kate and Amber.
Later, Mark goes to the Bahamas on a supposed business trip, and Kate decides to follow and expose him. When she arrives she is surprised to find Carly and Amber at the airport, who explain that Mark has set up Kate as the owner of the companies he defrauded, which, were his fraud to be discovered, would result in Kate going to prison rather than him. Kate also finds out that Mark has been seeing yet another woman, someone he has met on this trip. This, and the possibility of her facing prison, motivates her to take action, with the help of Carly's legal expertise. Amber also confides to Carly that she is seeing someone else as well.
When Mark returns from the vacation, he visits Carly at her office. He is locked in a conference room by her assistant and friend, Lydia (Nicki Minaj), and is stunned to see his wife, his girlfriend and his summer fling sitting in there together. They proceed to confront him with his infidelities and embezzlement. With Carly as her attorney, Kate presents divorce papers and a list of their assets. She reveals how she, having been named CEO by Mark, has returned all of his embezzled money to the companies he stole it from from, saving both of them from prison time but leaving him bankrupt, much to his shock and hysterical outrage. Mark's former business partner Nick (David Thornton) then arrives and acknowledges Kate's work while firing him.
Mark leaves, fuming, and the three women all applaud one another; as he rushes away in a huff, he smashes into an empty room's glass paneling, drastically cutting himself and ripping his coat. He exits to find his car being towed away before receiving a departing punch in the face from Frank.
In the film's epilogue, Kate takes over Mark's job with Nick and becomes CEO of several successful companies, making big profits under her honest leadership. Carly and Phil have fallen in love and are now expecting a child. Amber and Frank are now a couple and are traveling the world together. The film ends with the three women toasting to their friendship and promising to never sleep with the same guy ever again.


== Cast ==

Cameron Diaz as Carly Whitten, an attorney who finds out that her boyfriend Mark is already married and has another girlfriend.
Leslie Mann as Kate King, a business educated housewife who discovers that her husband Mark is cheating on her with two women.
Kate Upton as Amber, an Amazon swimsuit supermodel, Mark's second girlfriend.
Nikolaj Coster-Waldau as Mark King, a wealthy businessman who is cheating on his wife Kate and two girlfriends Carly and Amber, at the same time.
Taylor Kinney as Phil Hampton, Kate's brother who becomes romantically involved with Carly.
Nicki Minaj as Lydia, Carly's confidante of an assistant.
Don Johnson as Frank Whitten, Carly's father who dates women half his age.
David Thornton as Nick, Mark's earlier business partner.
Olivia Culpo as Raven-Haired Beauty, one of Mark's conquests in the Caribbean
Radio Man (Craig Castaldo) as himself


== Production ==


=== Development ===
On January 16, 2012, it was announced that 2007 Black Listed screenwriter Melissa Stack was hired by 20th Century Fox to write an untitled female revenge comedy, which Julie Yorn would produce through LBI Productions. The film's script was described as the original idea from the 1996 film The First Wives Club, but with younger leads. The film's title was revealed to be The Other Woman on November 13. In January of the following year, Nick Cassavetes signed on to direct the film.


=== Casting ===

In November 2012, Cameron Diaz was in talks for the lead role. Diaz's representative also revealed that actress Kristen Wiig was under consideration for the wife role. In March 2013, Leslie Mann and Nikolaj Coster-Waldau  were in talks to join the film, and Diaz was confirmed for her role. The following month, Kate Upton, Taylor Kinney, and Nicki Minaj, in her feature film debut, joined the film. Don Johnson was cast in June as Diaz's character's father.


=== Filming ===

In March 2013, the shooting was set to begin late-spring or early summer 2013 in New York City. Later it was told that the production would begin in May 2013. Principal photography  began on April 29, 2013, and filming was completed by August 27, 2013. Much of the filming took place in parts of New York, including Long Island, The Hamptons, and Westhampton Beach. From July 18–23, filming took place in New Providence, where Nassau, The Bahamas was used as the filming location. The Atlantis Paradise Island was also used as the shooting location. Isola Trattoria and Crudo Bar at Mondrian Hotel in SoHo, Manhattan was used for the scene in which the women met for a celebration toast at the end of the film.


=== Music ===
The Other Woman's music was composed by Aaron Zigman, who was reportedly set to score the film on May 31, 2013. The film featured songs from various artists including Etta James, Ester Dean, Morcheeba, Cyndi Lauper, Britt Nicole, Patty Griffin, Lorde, Keyshia Cole and Iggy Azalea.


== Release ==
On March 31, 2014, the film had a world premiere in Amsterdam; the next day, on April 1, it had a UK premiere at the Curzon Mayfair Cinema in London. The film later had a US premiere on April 21 in Westwood, California.On March 25, 2014, Fox appealed the R-rating, which Motion Picture Association of America gave the film for sexual references. The studio wanted a PG-13 rating. On April 9, the MPAA's rating appeals board took back the R and gave the film a PG-13; the sources confirmed that there were no changes made to get the film PG-13. The Other Woman was released on April 25 in the United States.


=== Box office ===
The Other Woman opened at number 1 in North America on April 25, 2014 in 3,205 theaters debuting atop the weekend box office with earnings of $24.7 million across the three days. The film grossed $83.9 million in the United States and Canada and $112.8 million in other territories for a total worldwide gross of $196.7 million, against a production budget of $40 million .


=== Home media ===
The Other Woman was released on DVD and Blu-ray on July 29, 2014. The Blu-ray edition features the Gag Reel, "Giggle Fit", Gallery and deleted scenes. In the United States, the film has grossed $9,592,336 from DVD sales and $4,163,463 from Blu-ray sales, making a total of $13,755,799.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
As of June 2020, the film holds a 25% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 164 reviews with an average rating of 4.24/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "The Other Woman definitely boasts a talented pedigree, but all that skill is never fully brought to bear on a story that settles for cheap laughs instead of reaching its empowering potential." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 39 out of 100 based on reviews from 35 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale.

Justin Chang of Variety said, "Beneath the wobbly pratfalls and the scatological setpieces, there's no denying the film's mean-spirited kick, or its more-than-passing interest in what makes its women tick." The Hollywood Reporter's critic Todd McCarthy said: "It would have helped if director Nick Cassavetes had something resembling a sure hand at comedy." Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club gave the film grade C-, saying "All of a sudden, a spotted Great Dane squats in the middle of a Manhattan apartment and out plop several gleaming, glistening CGI turds. It's one of those cases where a Hollywood movie inadvertently summarizes itself in a single shot." Michael Phillips of Chicago Tribune gave the film two and a half stars out of four, saying "Line to line, it's fresher than any number of guy-centric "Hangover"-spawned affairs, despite director Cassavetes' lack of flair for slapstick." The Boston Globe's Ty Burr gave the film one out of four stars and said, "It's "The First Wives Club" rewritten for younger, less demanding audiences, or a "9 to 5" with absolutely nothing at stake." Stephanie Zacharek of The Village Voice said, "The Other Woman doesn't give these actresses much to do except look ridiculous, if not sneaky and conniving."

Michael Sragow of Orange County Register gave the film grade C, saying that the film is "a coarse, rickety comedy." Richard Corliss wrote for Time magazine that "All three women are less watchable and amusing than Nicki Minaj as Carly's legal assistant Lydia." Film critic Stephen Holden of The New York Times said that the film is "so dumb, lazy, clumsily assembled and unoriginal, it could crush any actor forced to execute its leaden slapstick gags and mouth its crude, humorless dialogue." James Berardinelli of ReelViews wondered, "Has it come to this for director Nick Cassavetes?", comparing his career negatively to that of his father, John Cassavetes. Berardinelli elaborated, "what a comedown to find him in charge of such an unfocused, unfunny, scatologically-obsessed 'comedy.'" Christy Lemire of RogerEbert.Com gave the film two out of four stars and said, "While "The Other Woman" raises some thoughtful questions about independence, identity and the importance of sisterhood, ultimately it would rather poop on them and then throw them through a window in hopes of the getting the big laugh." Wesley Morris of Grantland said, "No one knows which takes are funny and which aren't. More than once, all three women, especially poor Upton, are caught looking like they don't know what they're doing."Bilge Ebiri of the magazine New York said, "You can't shake the feeling that in a just world, all these women – even Kate Upton – would have better material than this." Connie Ogle of The Miami Herald gave the film three out of four stars and called the film a "goofy, ridiculous, with more gross-out humor than is strictly necessary but still funny. It falls into the category of Girlfriend Films – as in, go with your girlfriends and leave your date/partner/spouse at home with the PlayStation or the NBA playoffs." Colin Covert of Star Tribune gave the film three out of four stars, saying "It's an escapist women's empowerment comedy like many others, but elevated by the simple virtue of being, for most of its length, very, very funny." Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post gave the film one and a half stars out of four, saying "A movie as generic and forgettable as the sofa-size art on its characters' walls." Linda Holmes wrote for NPR, calling the film "a conceptually odious, stupid-to-the-bone enterprise ..." Betsy Sharkey of the Los Angeles Times advised guys to "Step away from the vehicle, because The Other Woman is out of control and intent on running down a certain kind of male."


=== Accolades ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Official website
The Other Woman at IMDb
The Other Woman at Box Office Mojo
The Other Woman at Rotten Tomatoes
The Other Woman at Metacritic