Trolls is a 2016 American computer-animated jukebox musical comedy film produced by DreamWorks Animation and based on the Good Luck Trolls dolls created by Thomas Dam. The film is directed by Mike Mitchell with a screenplay by Jonathan Aibel and Glenn Berger from a story by Erica Rivinoja. The film features the voices of Anna Kendrick, Justin Timberlake, Christopher Mintz-Plasse, Zooey Deschanel, Christine Baranski, Russell Brand, James Corden, Jeffrey Tambor, John Cleese and Gwen Stefani. The film follows two trolls who go on a quest to save their village from destruction by the Bergens, creatures who eat Trolls to be happy.
The film premiered on October 8, 2016 at the BFI London Film Festival and was theatrically released in the United States on November 4, by 20th Century Fox. The film received mixed reviews from critics and grossed $346 million worldwide against its $125 million budget. It received an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Song for "Can't Stop the Feeling!".
A sequel, Trolls World Tour, was released on April 10, 2020.


== Plot ==
The Trolls are small, colorful, perpetually-happy creatures who sing, dance, and hug all day. They are discovered by the gigantic, ugly, and miserable Bergens, who believe they can only feel happy by consuming a Troll. The Bergens imprison the Trolls in a caged tree, and eat them every year on a special occasion, Trollstice.
On the year that Prince Gristle Jr., son of King Gristle, is due to eat his first troll, the chef in charge of the ceremony discovers that the Troll King Peppy has taken his infant daughter, Princess Poppy, and his people and organized an escape. King Gristle banishes Chef, and she vows to find the trolls, while secretly plotting to become a hero and take over the kingdom as revenge for her exile.
Twenty years later, an adult Poppy organizes a gigantic party to celebrate the anniversary of the escape. A short-tempered, grey, survivalist troll named Branch warns that this could compromise their position, but everyone ignores him. His warnings come true when Chef follows the lights and noise and kidnaps several trolls, including Poppy's love interest, a "zen" troll named Creek. While the rest cower in Branch's survival bunker, Poppy sets off alone to rescue the victims. She naively gets herself into several potentially deadly situations and is finally rescued by Branch, who believes the quest is hopeless and reluctantly followed her to escape his crowded bunker.
Upon arrival in Bergen Town, Poppy and Branch see the now-King Gristle Jr. seemingly served Creek by Chef. Poppy still holds out hope Creek is alive, and finds the rest of the trolls guarded by a scullery maid named Bridget. Learning that Bridget is secretly in love with Gristle Jr., Poppy and the trolls agree to help her get a date in exchange for her help in ascertaining if Creek is alive. Branch refuses to sing along with the rest in the ensuing musical number; he and Poppy argue, and he reveals that he has refused to sing ever since his singing compromised his home's location to Chef, who took and presumably ate his grandmother. His color turned from blue to grey that day from the guilt.
Poppy comforts him with a hug, and the trolls disguise Bridget as "Lady Glittersparkles". She and Gristle Jr. go on a date at a roller rink/arcade restaurant, and Poppy spots Creek held captive in a jewel on Gristle's mantle. After the date, the trolls go to Gristle's room and attempt to free Creek, but discover the jewel is empty. Chef then arrives and recaptures everyone, and Poppy is horrified to learn that Creek, in exchange for his own survival, has betrayed them all to Chef. He steals Poppy's cowbell and uses it to summon the rest of the trolls, whom Chef captures and places in a pot intended to be served at the feast. Poppy loses hope completely, and all the trolls fall into despair and turn gray.
Branch, realizing he has fallen in love with Poppy, sings "True Colors" to cheer her up. Poppy reciprocates his feelings and sings along, and all the trolls, including Branch, regain their hope and their colors. Bridget, unwilling to see harm come to the trolls, releases them while Chef isn't looking. Poppy, knowing how the angry Bergens will react, refuses to allow Bridget to sacrifice herself. The trolls return and explain to the Bergens that Bridget is Lady Glittersparkles, and that she and Gristle are already happy being in love with one another.
Through the song "Can't Stop the Feeling", the trolls show the Bergens they too can find happiness inside themselves, bringing light and color and joy to Bergen Town. The vengeful Chef refuses to accept the peace, and she and Creek are put on a flaming serving cart and sent rolling out of the castle into the woods. Poppy is made Queen of the Trolls, and she and Branch share a friendly hug.
In a mid-credits scene, Chef tries to eat Creek, but both of them end up being eaten by a hill-shaped monster.


== Cast ==

Anna Kendrick as Princess Poppy, the sweet, optimistic, and naïve Princess, and later Queen (at the end) of the Trolls.Iris Dohrn as Baby Poppy
Justin Timberlake as Branch, an over-cautious, pessimistic, but good-hearted survivalist Troll who have a secret crush on Poppy.Liam Henry as Young Branch
Christopher Mintz-Plasse as King Gristle Jr., the Prince (at the start), and later King of the Bergens.
Zooey Deschanel as Bridget, a kind-hearted Bergen who works as a scullery maid to Chef. She also had a secret crush on Gristle Jr.
Christine Baranski as Chef, the sadistic, cruel and power-hungry chef of the Bergens.
Russell Brand as Creek, Poppy's first Troll crush who pretends to be "zen" but is actually a coward and a fraud who then betrays all the other Trolls just so he won't be eaten, breaking Poppy's heart and destroying her whole happiness. 
James Corden as Biggie, a large, friendly Troll and one of Poppy's friends.
Jeffrey Tambor as King Peppy, the King of the Trolls and Poppy’s father who once led his people to freedom from the Bergens.
John Cleese as King Gristle Sr., the King of the Bergens at the start of the film and Gristle Jr’s father.
Gwen Stefani as DJ Suki, a Troll who uses DJ equipment made of insects and one of Poppy's friends.
Ron Funches as Cooper, a giraffe-like Troll and one of Poppy's friends.
Icona Pop as Satin and Chenille, twin Trolls who are conjoined by their hair and love fashion and two of Poppy's friends.
Kunal Nayyar as Guy Diamond, a glittery, naked Troll with a highly Auto-tuned voice and one of Poppy's friends.
Quvenzhané Wallis as Harper, a Troll artist with heterochromia who paints with her hair.
GloZell as Grandma Rosiepuff, an elderly Troll and Branch's late grandmother, who sacrificed herself when she and Branch were captured by a Bergen. Dami Im voices the character in the Australian version. Susanna Reid voices the character in the UK version.
Meg DeAngelis as Moxie Dewdrop, a dancing Troll. Connie Glynn voices the character in the UK version.
Ricky Dillon as Aspen Heitz, a Troll skitterboarder. Greg James voices the character in the UK version.
Kandee Johnson as Mandy Sparkledust, a Troll who designs and repairs all the treasures of Troll Town. Abbey Clancy voices the character in the UK version.
Walt Dohrn as:Smidge, a small female Troll with a masculine voice and one of Poppy's friends.
Mr. Dinkles, Biggie's pet worm.
Fuzzbert, a Troll with green hair and two legs and one of Poppy's friends.
Cloud Guy, an anthropomorphic cloud.
Grace Helbig as Cookie Sugarloaf, one of the Trolls. Carrie Hope Fletcher voices the character in the UK version.
Mike Mitchell and Curtis Stone as Chad and Todd, two royal guards that work for the Bergen Royal Family.
Rhys Darby as Bibbly, a Bergen shopkeeper of the Bib Store.


== Production ==

DreamWorks announced plans for a film based on the Troll toyline as early as 2010. This version was to be written by Adam Wilson and Melanie Wilson LaBracio. By 2012, Chloë Grace Moretz had already been cast in the female lead role and Jason Schwartzman was reported to have been offered the male lead. In September 2012, 20th Century Fox and DreamWorks Animation announced that the film with the working title Trolls would be released on June 5, 2015, with Anand Tucker set to direct the film, written by Wallace Wolodarsky and Maya Forbes.By April 2013, DreamWorks Animation had acquired the intellectual property for the Trolls franchise from the Dam Family and Dam Things. Having "big plans for the franchise," DreamWorks Animation became the exclusive worldwide licensor of the merchandise rights, except for Scandinavia, where Dam Things remains the licensor. In May 2013, the film was pushed back for a year to November 4, 2016. The same month, DreamWorks Animation announced that Mike Mitchell and Erica Rivinoja has been hired as a director and screenplay writer to "reimagine" the film as a musical comedy, which would present the origin of the Trolls' colorful hair. On June 16, 2014, Anna Kendrick joined the cast to voice Poppy, a princess. On September 15, 2015, Deadline Hollywood reported that Justin Timberlake would voice a character named Branch. Timberlake previously worked with DreamWorks Animation as the voice of Arthur "Artie" Pendragon in Shrek the Third in 2007. The full cast announced their respective roles via announcements on Twitter on January 6, 2016.


== Music ==

Justin Timberlake served as an executive producer for the film's music and released the original song "Can't Stop the Feeling!" in conjunction with "Hello Darkness" on May 6, 2016. The song reached No. 1 in the official charts of 17 countries, including the United States and Canada. In addition to Timberlake, the rest of the cast contributed to the film's soundtrack, which also features guest appearances from Earth, Wind & Fire and Ariana Grande. The soundtrack album was certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America and the Australian Recording Industry Association.


== Release ==
The film's opening premiere opened at the BFI London Film Festival Opening Celebration on October 8, 2016 as a special BFI presentation, and was theatrically released on November 4, 2016, in the United States by 20th Century Fox.
The studio spent an estimated $105 million promoting the film.


=== Home media ===
Trolls was released on Digital HD on January 24, 2017, and on DVD and Blu-ray on February 7, 2017. The film topped the home video sales chart for two consecutive weeks.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Trolls grossed $153.7 million in the US and Canada and $193.2 million in other countries for a worldwide total of $346.8 million, against a budget of $125 million. Deadline Hollywood calculated the film made a net profit of $19 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues.In the United States and Canada, Trolls was released alongside the releases of Doctor Strange and Hacksaw Ridge, and was projected to gross $35–40 million from 4,060 theaters in its opening weekend. On its first day, the film grossed $12.3 million (including $900,000 made from Thursday night previews). It went on to open to $46.5 million, finishing second at the box office behind Doctor Strange.


=== Critical response ===
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 76% based on 162 reviews, with an average rating of 6.30/10. The site's critical consensus reads: "Trolls brings its instantly recognizable characters to the big screen in a colorful adventure that, while geared toward the younger set, isn't without rewards for parents." On Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating, the film has a score of 55 out of 100, based on 32 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it an 80% overall positive score.Lindsey Bahr of Associated Press gave the film a positive review and said, "Ultimately, the 'get happy' moral of the story, while trite compared to something like Inside Out, is sufficiently sweet enough for its audience. Did you expect more from a piece of candy?" Bill Zwecker of Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four and said, "You simply will walk out – or perhaps dance out – of the theater feeling very happy yourself." Andy Webster of The New York Times said, "Exuberant, busy and sometimes funny, DreamWorks Animation's Trolls is determined to amuse."Michael Rechtshaffen, writing for The Hollywood Reporter, called the film "an admittedly vibrant-looking but awfully recognizable animated musical comedy concoction." Alonso Duralde of TheWrap said the film "combines the barely-there characterization and irritating cutesiness of The Smurfs with the hideous character design and awful pop covers of Strange Magic." Betsy Bozdech of Common Sense Media gave the movie 4 stars. She said, "Make no mistake: Kids are going to love this movie. Trolls is cute, it's colorful, it has tons of catchy songs, and the messages are positive and easy to understand (happiness is inside everyone, if you know where/how to find it, and you shouldn't have to change who you are to get someone to like you)."


=== Accolades ===
Regarding music award shows, only film-related categories are included on this list.


== Franchise ==

DreamWorks Trolls: The Experience was the first of multiple mobile pop-up attractions Feld Entertainment and Universal Brand Development had agreed to develop in April 2018. The pop-up attraction opened in New York City on October 22, 2018.


=== Sequel ===

On February 28, 2017, Universal Pictures, the studio's new distributor and parent company since 2016, and DreamWorks Animation announced that a sequel titled Trolls 2 would be released on April 10, 2020, with Kendrick and Timberlake reprising their roles of Poppy and Branch as well as Aibel and Berger returning to write the script. On October 4, 2017, the release date for the sequel was moved up to February 14, 2020, as Fast & Furious 9 took its original April 10, 2020 slot. Along with the new release date, it was announced that Dohrn will be returning to direct and Shay will return to produce the sequel. On December 6, 2017, the film was pushed back to an April 17, 2020 release. On March 4, 2020, No Time to Die got delayed, so the film was pushed to an April 10, 2020 release again.In May 2018, it was confirmed that Sam Rockwell, Chance the Rapper, Anthony Ramos, Karan Soni, Flula Borg, and Jamie Dornan joined the cast. Corden, Icona Pop, Funches, Stefani and Nayyar will also reprise their roles. In October 2018, it was confirmed that Kelly Clarkson had joined the cast, and will perform an original song.A new title for the sequel, Trolls World Tour, was announced in June 2018. In May 2017, podcasters Justin, Travis and Griffin McElroy began campaigning for roles in the film via a podcast titled "The McElroy Brothers Will Be in Trolls 2" (later renamed "The McElroy Brothers Will Be in Trolls: World Tour" after the sequel's subtitle was revealed). Following the podcast's popularity, DreamWorks confirmed in September 2018 that the McElroy brothers would make cameo appearances in World Tour.In June 2019, along with promotional posters, new cast members have been announced, which include: J Balvin, Mary J. Blige, Rachel Bloom, George Clinton, Ester Dean and Gustavo Dudamel.


=== Television special ===

Trolls Holiday is a half-hour television special that aired on November 24, 2017 on NBC. Set after the film, Poppy realizes that the Bergens have no holidays to celebrate. She enlists Branch and their friends (the Snack Pack) to show their best friend Bridget and other Bergens the importance of holidays. Most of the original cast (including Kendrick, Timberlake, Deschanel, Mintz-Plasse, Corden, Funches, Nayyar and Dohrn) all reprise their roles from the film. The likely-Christmas Special is also directed by Crawford and written by Josh Bycel & Jonathan Fener with music by Jeff Morrow. Its soundtrack album that features seven songs was released on October 27, 2017. It is now available on Netflix and on DVD by Universal Pictures Home Entertainment. The bonus features of the DVD also include one episode of Spirit Riding Free and two of Home: Adventures with Tip & Oh.


=== Animated series ===

A 52-episode animated series based on the film, entitled Trolls: The Beat Goes On! that airs on Netflix premiered on January 19, 2018 and ran for 8 seasons. The show stars Amanda Leighton as Poppy, Skylar Astin as Branch, and Funches who is reprising his role as Cooper, and Dohrn reprising his role as Cloud Guy.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Dreamworks Trolls Party
Trolls at IMDb
Trolls at The Big Cartoon DataBase
Trolls at Box Office Mojo
Trolls at Rotten Tomatoes
Trolls at Metacritic
Trolls at AllMovie
 Naver Korean Film Website.