BloodRayne: The Third Reich is a 2011 direct-to-DVD action-adventure horror film written by Michael Nachoff and directed by Uwe Boll, and starring Natassia Malthe as dhamphir Rayne and Michael Paré as vampire Nazi officer Ekart Brand. Set in 1943 Europe during World War II, it is the third and final installment of the BloodRayne film series, based on the video game series of the same name. It is a sequel to BloodRayne and BloodRayne 2: Deliverance, also directed by Boll. It is the second BloodRayne film to star Malthe after BloodRayne 2: Deliverance. Paré, who played Iancu in BloodRayne and Pat Garrett in BloodRayne 2: Deliverance, plays yet another character in this film. BloodRayne: The Third Reich received negative reviews.


== Plot ==
Rayne (Natassia Malthe) fights against the Nazis in Europe during World War II with the French resistance, encountering Commander Ekart Brand (Michael Pare), a Nazi leader whose goal is to inject Adolf Hitler with Rayne's blood in an attempt to transform him into an all powerful dhampir and attain immortality.The film opens with train cars full of humans being sent to concentration camps when they're intercepted by a French resistance group. Soon, Rayne arrives and kills most of the Nazi troops and corners their commander in a train car. As the two talk, a Nazi shoots Rayne, splashing her blood on the commander's face. Rayne kills the soldier before impaling the commander on a pole and leaving him to die. Rayne soon converses with the leader of the resistance, Nathaniel Gregor (Brendan Fletcher), who is aware that Rayne is a dhampir. After finding the train cars full of prisoners, the resistance and Rayne decide to work together to fight the Nazis. After they leave however, the commander is revealed to have survived his presumed death as a result of some of Rayne's blood getting in his mouth, implying that he is a dhampir.
Back at the headquarters of the Third Reich, a scientist named Dr. Wolfgang Mangler (Clint Howard) is torturing vampires as a way of studying them so he can make Adolf Hitler and the Third Reich immortal. A Third Reich Lieutenant Kaspar Jaeger (Steffen Mennekes) informs the doctor that the commander was attacked by a 'vampire' in the daytime, intriguing his interest.
Elsewhere, Rayne heads to a brothel to get a massage when she overhears a soldier beating on one of the women. Angered by the beating interrupting her massage, Rayne easily beats the man down, forcing the owner of the brothel to close early, despite being warned that the Nazis would suspect something is wrong. She ignores the warning and angrily tells Rayne that she better not be a problem for her business. Rayne simply scoffs at the woman before walking off. As Rayne prepares to leave, a voluptuous woman stops Rayne and thanks her for saving the woman from before, taking off Rayne's robe. Another woman lights several candles as the woman continues to hit on Rayne. The woman walks out, telling Rayne and the busty woman to "have fun". Initially refusing her advances at first, the woman finally manages to seduce Rayne and has sex with her. As the woman sexually dominates Rayne, one of the women listens to their intercourse, smiling mischievously before walking out of the brothel. Rayne continues to have sex with the woman, finally climaxing as she kisses down Rayne's body.
The woman that listened to Rayne's love session tells the commander about Rayne assaulting the soldier from earlier in exchange for running the brothel she works at, since she hates the woman currently running it. The commander flirts with the woman, commenting on her beauty before biting her.
Back at the brothel, Rayne is fully dressed, as Nazi soldiers have arrived to kill Rayne. After cutting them down with her swords, she is reunited with the commander. Horrified to learn that she sired a Nazi commander, she flees. The Nazis fire at Rayne, managing to hit her, though she brushes it off and escapes. This angers the commander, as he wants her alive. Dr. Mangler rushes to where Rayne was shot, and collects her blood for more research.
Rayne gathers with Nathaniel, by asking him for weapons, and dynamite, but he refuses. Rayne and Nathaniel go to look for Magda Markovic (Annett Culp) in a bar, and she gives them some codes. Upon leaving, Rayne fights two vampires and kills them. Rayne has a nightmare about fighting Hitler, who is now a dhampir after biting her. The commander talks to his lieutenant Jaeger and bites him. Nathaniel and Rayne find Basil. Hearing the Director go to Berlin to create an army of vampires, the lieutenant Jaeger attacks them, after Rayne killed him.
The resistance fights the soldiers but they capture Magda and the director tortures her by biting her. The resistance discovers that their hiding place was attacked upon learning that it was a distraction. Rayne attacks and kill soldiers, she and the resistance found Magda, but she is a vampire, and Rayne kills her. Then, when attacked by vampire soldiers, the resistance escapes,but Nathaniel and Rayne are taken prisoner, where Mangler draws Rayne's blood.
Being transported in a truck to Berlin, Nathaniel takes care of Rayne, and they have sex. The resistance puts dynamite in the way, to rescue Rayne and Nathaniel. In the fight, the commander drinks Rayne's blood and Mangler escapes,but is killed by Natalia. Finally, Rayne kills the commander, but she knows there is more work. In Berlin, Rayne, Nathaniel and the resistance arrive at another Nazi base, giving them a surprise.


== Cast ==
Natassia Malthe as Rayne
Michael Paré as Commander Ekart Brand
Brendan Fletcher as Nathaniel Gregor
Clint Howard as Dr. Wolfgang Mangler, based on the Nazi doctor Josef Mengele
Willam Belli as Vasyl Tishenko
Natalia Guslistaya as Natalia, the sniper
Annett Culp as Magda Marković
Steffen Mennekes as Lieutenant Kaspar Jaeger
Arved Birnbaum as Director
Safiya Kaygin as Svetlana Koerk
Nik Goldman as Bartender
Vjekoslav Katusin as German Soldier
Goran Manić as Boris
Fabrice Colson as Partisan
Petar Benčić as Driver
Boris Bakal as Adolf Hitler


== Production ==
Boll has originally planned to begin filming in Croatia in 2008 under the title BloodRayne 3: Warhammer, but it was later announced that filming would begin January 2010. The title was changed to BloodRayne: The Third Reich and shooting began in Zagreb, Croatia with Natassia Malthe and Michael Paré in the lead roles. Some speculation has it that a tie-in to the video game Nocturne is present through the character Svetlana who is a rumored vampire in a video post on YouTube.Michael Paré has appeared in all three films in the BloodRayne franchise, but as different characters; Iancu, Pat Garrett and, Commandant Ekart Brand respectively.


== Reception ==
Like the previous BloodRayne films, BloodRayne: The Third Reich received mostly negative reviews from critics. Main criticisms were towards the acting, script and Boll's direction.


== See also ==
Vampire film


== References ==


== External links ==
BloodRayne: The Third Reich at IMDb
BloodRayne: The Third Reich at Rotten Tomatoes