Cars (also known as Cars: The Video Game) is an open world racing video game, based on the 2006 Pixar film of the same name. Developed by Rainbow Studios, it was released for the GameCube, PlayStation 2, Xbox, Microsoft Windows, Game Boy Advance, Nintendo DS, and PSP in June 2006, with versions for the Xbox 360 and Wii released later that year. The Wii version includes functionality geared towards its Wii Remote controller, and was a launch game for the system.
Taking place after the events of the film, the player controls protagonist Lightning McQueen as he participates in the new racing season with the end goal of winning the Piston Cup for the first time in his career, while also racing and training with the local community of Radiator Springs. In the PSP version, the player controls Lightning McQueen. After meeting and almost colliding with the Delinquent Road Hazards gang, he challenges them to a race to which they agree. The consoles versions feature the full the voice-over cast from the film, including the likes of Owen Wilson, Michael Keaton, Paul Newman, and Larry the Cable Guy. However in the PSP and DS versions, Lightning McQueen is instead voiced by Keith Ferguson.The home console and PC versions received generally positive reviews from critics, though the GBA version saw negative reception. The game was followed by two sequels; Cars Mater-National Championship (2007) and Cars Race-O-Rama (2009).


== Gameplay ==
The console versions of the game are set in the fictional town of Radiator Springs, where it takes place after the movie. The player must compete in 19 road races, 8 mini-games, and 5 piston cup races to help Lightning McQueen  win his first Piston Cup. In the PSP version, the game presumably takes place between the events of the movie and the events of the other versions, or on an alternate timeline. The player must compete in 13 races, as well as 5 boss races, to help Lightning McQueen kick Chick Hicks' crew out of Radiator Springs.  The game takes place in a sand box environment in the vein of Need for Speed, Grand Theft Auto  and Midnight Club and features ten playable characters from the film, all voiced by the original voice talent.  The game also features a number of minigames and items for the player to collect.


== Reception ==

Cars received generally positive reviews. GameSpot gave 7.0 out of 10 for Xbox 360 and Wii versions, 7.6 out of 10 for the GameCube and Xbox versions, and 7.4 out of 10 for the PSP version. Metacritic gave 65 out of 100 for the Wii version, 54 out of 100 for the DS version, 73 out of 100 for the PC version, 71 out of 100 for the PlayStation 2 version, and 70 out of 100 for the PSP version.The PlayStation 2 and Nintendo DS releases of Cars each received a "Platinum" sales award from the Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association (ELSPA), indicating sales of at least 300,000 copies per version in the United Kingdom. In total, the game sold more than 8 million copies as of May 2007.The GBA version was criticized as being "the worst version of the game" because of its incredibly short length, zoomed in camera, a lack of a multiplayer mode, and a lack of any depth.


== References ==


== External links ==
Cars at MobyGames
Cars (Game Boy Advance) at MobyGames
Cars (Nintendo DS) at MobyGames
Cars (PlayStation Portable) at MobyGames