Codename: Kids Next Door – Operation: V.I.D.E.O.G.A.M.E. (Villains In Detention Escape Outpost Growing Amalgamation Mega Enormously) is a 2005 platform game developed by High Voltage Software and published by Global Star Software. It was released for the GameCube, Xbox, and PlayStation 2, and is based on the American animated television series Codename: Kids Next Door, which aired from 2002 to 2008 on Cartoon Network.
Operation: V.I.D.E.O.G.A.M.E. is one of the only two video games to be solely based on Codename: Kids Next Door. The other, Operation: S.O.D.A., is a 2D platform game developed by Vicarious Visions for the Game Boy Advance.


== Plot ==
One day, the KND are playing a videogame. While Numbuh 2 gives Numbuh 1 a training simulation helmet, which according to Numbuh 2 "a numbuh one size fits all." Then, the Toilenator shows up and ties up the rest of the team, while Numbuh 1 thinks this is a simulation, not the real thing. So after he defeats the "simulated" Toilenator, he decides to throw him out the window, which he also thinks is simulated.
After Numbuh 1 frees the team, and they inform him that the Toilenator is, in fact real, Numbuh 86 reports. The most dangerous villains the KND has fought have escaped from the maximum security prison at the KND Arctic Base. Numbuh 86 states that while she will normally get the other KND sectors to help out they are all at the beach and so Sector V is tasked with recapturing the villains and taking them to their even more maximum security prison on the dark side of the moon.
She also mentions that Gramma Stuffum has taken over the Sprinkle Puff Donut Shoppe and is filling the donuts with liver and spinach creme Numbuh 1 has decided to go after Gramma Stuffum and assigns Numbuhs 2, 3, and 5 to track down the other villains while leaving Numbuh 4 to guard the Treehouse (a role in which with he is not happy).  Numbuh 1 makes his way through the Sprinkle Puff Donut Shoppe through a giant oven, a giant fan, a river of dough, and finally confronting Gramma Stuffum and her Chuck Wagon in her lair. After he defeats Gramma Stuffum Numbuh 1 gets a call from Numbuh 4 (who really needs the toilet) informing him that the KND Treehouse is covered in snot. Numbuh 1 is convinced that all the snot means the Common Cold has invaded the treehouse. He informs all of Sector V that the treehouse is under attack and Numbuh 5 heads back to stop him meanwhile a mysterious person steals the engine core from the Chuck Wagon.
Arriving back at the treehouse Numbuh 5 finds out that the Common Cold has infected the Treehouse Security System And turns the defences against her so Numbuh 5 is tasked to get through the snot infested Treehouse to try and turn off the Treehouse Security System, defeat the Flu Bugs and W.A.T.C.H.B.O.T.S and free Numbuh 4.
After Numbuh 5 achieves this, the Common Cold introduces his Snot Bomber, which happens to be floating outside the treehouse. Numbuh 2 appears piloting the KND C.O.O.L.B.U.S, which he uses to chase the Common Cold through the countryside, city and finally confronting the Snot Bomber at the beach. Afterwards the same mysterious person appears in a jetpack and takes the power core from the Snot Bomber, causing it to plummet to the ground, but Numbuh 2 doesn't notice this because he is trying to pick up the phone he dropped.
While Numbuh 4 is at ‘the toilet we never use’ (as all the other toilets are still full of snot and he has been holding it in since the Common Cold captured him), the power goes out and one-by-one, Count Spankulot has turned the KND (excluding Numbuh 4) into spank-happy vampires.
Once Numbuh 4 finds out about his teammates, he travels through the treehouse to find and defeat them.
Once all the KND are back to normal, they have decided their next course of action will be catching all the hamsters to repower the treehouse (as Count Spankulot has released them while Numbuh 4 is fighting the other KND members). Unfortunately chasing the hamsters tires them out, except for Numbuh 3, who thinks this as a game. So Numbuh 3 is assigned to catch all the hamsters throughout the treehouse and restart the power core.
Once Numbuh 3 powers up the treehouse, Numbuh 1 has decided to strike back at Count Spankulot. Numbuh 1 heads out and browses the neighborhood to free children, defeat Count Spankulot's minions, and to confront Count Spankulot at the School Clocktower among a barrage of enemies.
After Count Spankulot's defeat, Numbuh 86 reports again. He states that while the KND are fighting Count Spankulot, Sector P has spotted Stickybeard and the Sweet Revenge off the coast of South Dakota. But their plan of using Numbuh 2's T.A.R.P.O.O.N to anchor a rope so Numbuh 5 may board the Sweet Revenge and capture Stickybeard has to be adjusted because of Numbuh 4's curiosity of pressing buttons resulted in the T.A.R.P.O.O.N being fired at the Treehouse instead of the Sweet Revenge so they make a plan to make a new T.A.R.P.O.O.N by collecting all the parts from the boats of Stickybeard's henchmen.
Once the new T.A.R.P.O.O.N. is built, Numbuh 2 fires it at the Sweet Revenge and Numbuh 5 slid along the T.A.R.P.O.O.N. rope to the ship.
Numbuh 5 then makes her way through the ship, defeating all of the pirates until she confronted Stickybeard in his candy treasury room. After Numbuh 5 defeats Stickybeard the mysterious person is revealed to be Numbuh 5's older sister Cree, who while once used to be a KND operative now works for the Delightful Children From Down the Lane and Father, then after she traps Numbuh 5 under Stickybeard she takes his candy cane peg leg and leaves.
Later that night, Numbuh 86 informs Sector V that Knightbrace is collecting fireflies for 'Bug Brite' glow in the dark toothpaste. Knowing Knightbrace has to be stopped (and the fact she adores fireflies). Numbuh 3 volunteers to browse the neighborhood for fireflies after finding and befriending one of the fireflies (and using her surprising knowledge of firefly speak) she convinces the firefly and any other fireflies that Knightbrace has not captured to help her burn through the garden fences to where the fireflies are being held captive, the School Clocktower. From here, Numbuh 3 uses the fireflies not being held captive to burn the jar lids open. This leaves a glow from the tower once the fireflies leave.
The fireflies grateful at being freed help the KND find the location of Knightbrace's Cavity Cave, from where Numbuh 1 will find the passcodes to open the path to Knightbrace's lair. Once here, Numbuh 1 crosses a river of pure fluoride and gets to a Dentadrone spawner to short circuit the entrance to Knightbrace's lair. Once in the lair, Numbuh 1 finds Knightbrace in his Dental Assault Chair.
After Numbuh 1 defeats Knightbrace, Numbuh 4 finds the Toilenator trying to flood the Treehouse with sewage (as he has tried to do at the beginning of the game). Numbuh 4 makes his way through the flooding treehouse, defeating the Toilenator's new henchmen, Scrummy Mummies and Poohemoths, to his room. Numbuh 4 challenges the Toilenator to a race to Numbuh 4's toilet. When Numbuh 4 wins, the Toilenator is sent to the C.O.O.L.B.U.S with the other villains.
The KND begin to take off after they have checked the villains. Since they are all there, the KND blast off for the moon in the C.O.O.L.B.U.S. While they're up there, Numbuh 2 mistakes the DCFDTL's Mega-Mansion for the Moon. The KND defeat all the Assault Satilities and the DCFDTL's Mega-Mansion.
But no sooner have the KND done this, the DCFDTL's Mega-Mansion sends out a beam which merges the villains. With the amalgamation bearing down on them Sector V And Numbuh 86 activate the T.R.E.E.H.E.M.O.T.H. After the amalgamation is defeated an explosion destroys the amalgamation and sends the villains flying. Later at the Moon Base Sector V is given celebratory medals by Numbuh 86 then the credits roll. It's later discovered that the adventure is just Sector V playing the game as Numbuh 3 celebrates that they've finished the game and Numbuhs 2 and 5 discussing special moves for the game (with Numbuh 4 complaining that sneaking is not a special move) Numbuh 1 reminds Sector V that the video game is in fact an important training exercise. However, the Toilenator then arrives at the Treehouse just like in the beginning suggest the events in the game are going to repeat themselves in reality.


== Reception ==

The game received generally mixed ratings, with the Gamecube version having overall better reception than the PS2 or Xbox versions. IGN rated it poorly, 4.0 out of 10, criticizing its bad camera angles and unreliable controls.


== References ==