PK: Out of the Shadows (known as Donald Duck PK in Europe) is an action-adventure video game developed by Ubi Soft Montreal and published by Ubi Soft. It stars Donald Duck as Paperinik or "PK" as he battles to stop the Evron Empire from taking over Earth. The game is based on the Italian comic book series PK – Paperinik New Adventures.


== Plot ==
Donald Duck works as a security guard in the Ducklair Tower. He falls asleep and starts dreaming of Daisy Duck and his nephews Huey, Dewey and Louie teasing him. He wishes he was a superhero. An artificial intelligence known as One agrees to help him. He is given a future technological weapon, a new voice, and the new name PK. Before PK can begin his training, they are alerted to the Evronians attack on Earth, prompting One to send PK out to defeat them as 'on the job training'.


== Gameplay ==
Players assume the control of PK, navigating 3D levels from a third person perspective.
PK uses an 'X-Transformer' arm device throughout the game, which functions as a utility for defense and movement, primarily firing laser shots and to hover over large gaps. More abilities are unlocked for the X-Transformer as the player progresses, unlocking a super punch for shattering weak ground, a supercharge to break enemy shields, a remote X-Transformer to navigate tight spaces and a more powerful costume variant.
As players traverse the levels, they will collect 'Activation Stars', green circular icons sporting One's face. These function as to power checkpoints for the player, requiring 15 to activate it so that should the player die, they'll return to that previously active checkpoint. The player will also find other weapon variants that give the X-Transformer a limited amount of more powerful shots such as fire bullets or rockets.
Also during certain level portions, the player will encounter captured scientists that must be found and rescued before the timer counts down, otherwise they will be teleported away, requiring the player to try again another time. There are six scientists per level (excluding boss battles and the Evronian Mothership), and 40 scientists must be rescued in order to access the final mothership levels.


== Voice cast ==
Tony Anselmo as Donald Duck
Tress MacNeille as Daisy Duck
Russi Taylor as Huey, Dewey, and Louie
Rob Paulsen as PK
James Horan as One
Danny Rutigliano as Zoster
Robert Davi as Zondag


== Reception ==

The game was met with mixed reception. GameRankings and Metacritic gave it a score of 51.41% and 49 out of 100 for the PlayStation 2 version, and 53.68% and 46 out of 100 for the GameCube version.


== References ==


== External links ==
PK: Out of the Shadows at MobyGames