Disney's Magical Mirror Starring Mickey Mouse, known in Japan as Mickey Mouse no Fushigi na Kagami (ミッキーマウスの不思議な鏡, lit. Mickey Mouse's Mysterious Mirror), is a 2002 adventure video game featuring Mickey Mouse, developed by Capcom, and published by Nintendo and Disney Interactive for the GameCube.


== Gameplay ==
The game uses a simple point-and-click mechanic, similar to Pac-Man 2: The New Adventures, which involves using a cursor to guide Mickey Mouse to various locations. Mickey will react to what the player does and what he encounters in the game by expressing curiosity, getting mad, falling down, running away, standing his ground, or other actions. At certain points, the player is able to have Mickey perform a special move that generally involves having him stomp on an onscreen enemy.
Mini-games, such as having Mickey fly an airplane or ski down a mountain, are available throughout the game. Special souvenirs may be uncovered as well, which are displayed in Mickey's room at the end of the game, such as Pluto's collar or Minnie's bow. When Mickey decided that it’s tv time, he runs off to watch some of his favorite cartoons. Clips include Steamboat Willie (his first ever sound cartoon), Wild Waves, The Band Concert, Thru the Mirror, Moving Day, Mr. Mouse Takes a Trip, Fantasia, The Little Whirlwind, Lend a Paw, Symphony Hour, Pluto and the Armadillo, Mickey and the Beanstalk, Mickey and the Seal, The Simple Things, Mickey's Christmas Carol, The Prince and the Pauper and Runaway Brain. The objective of the game is to find all the pieces of the mirror, so that Mickey goes back home. There are ghosts everywhere in each room that Mickey’s involved in, similar to Luigi's Mansion. The game ends when you find all the pieces of the mirror that Mickey uses to go back home, but before he does it, he tells a ghost that he wants to race him back home! So he runs off to go to bed. But then the rooster crows and wakes him up. Then he runs downstairs to have breakfast and the ghost in the ceiling can be shown laughing when it’s 100% complete.


== Plot ==
One night when Mickey is fast asleep, he falls into a dream where a mischievous ghost traps a dream vision of himself inside a magic mirror. Stuck in an alternate universe that strangely resembles his own house, Mickey yearns to get back through the mirror to his own house and his own bed in order to wake up from this dreamlike state; however, the ghost destroys the mirror and the pieces shrink and fly off to different areas around the house, which turns the magic mirror into a normal mirror. The player must direct Mickey to outwit and pull gags in order to get past enemies, obstacles, and the aforementioned ghost and recover the twelve broken mirror pieces he needs to go home again and search for twelve magic stars (needed to pull gags) and items needed to help him throughout his quest. Whenever he finds a piece, it will fly back to the mirror, return to its normal size, and put itself back in place. After repairing the mirror, he prepares to leave, but the ghost stops him, revealing that it only brought him here so he can have someone to play with. The player could either chose to stay or go. Choosing to stay will make the ghost run off, leaving Mickey stuck in the alternate world until he reenters the mirror room where the player can choose to stay or leave again. If the player chooses to leave, Mickey says goodbye to the ghost and begins to go home, but the ghost decides to go with him (only if the player has collected all twelve mirror pieces). After Mickey wakes up, he goes downstairs to get something to eat. A model of the ghost is shown hanging on the ceiling fan and the ghost's laughter is heard.


== Development ==
The game was teased at Nintendo's Space World 2001 presentation with a series of screenshots, which was assumed to be a platformer like much the vein of Disney's Magical Quest on the Super NES. The title was formally announced at the 2002 Electronic Entertainment Expo.
The game's introduction sequence is loosely based on "Thru the Mirror", a 1936 Mickey Mouse cartoon; Mickey's animations are replicated from the short. An alternate scene later in the game, where Mickey grows to a tremendous size then shrinks to a minuscule size, was also replicated as in the cartoon.


== Reception ==

The game received mixed reviews. For the most part, the player is given no instructions and cut scenes are limited to watching Mickey get chased or falling through to the next area.


== See also ==
Disney's Hide and Sneak
List of Disney video games


== References ==