Godzilla: Destroy All Monsters Melee is a fighting game developed by Pipeworks Software and published by Infogrames under the Atari brand for GameCube in 2002. A similar but different game was later released for Game Boy Advance as Godzilla: Domination! A version for the Xbox with additional content was released in 2003. A PlayStation 2 version was also planned, but was cancelled.


== Gameplay ==
The player plays as one of several  giant monsters (twelve playable characters: Anguirus, Destoroyah, Gigan, Godzilla 90s, Godzilla 2000, King Ghidorah, Mecha-King Ghidorah, Megalon, Orga, Rodan, and Mechagodzilla). The player must defeat their opponents via punches, kicks, and limb attacks (usually a tail-attack). Each monster can use their signature beam attack and throw environmental objects. Army forces (missile and freeze tanks) and the monster Hedorah (which slows a monster's energy regeneration) are also present and sporadically attack all monsters. Extras include powerup orbs, which provide additional health, energy, unlock a finishing move, or summon Mothra for an airstrike. Extra features include choice of several locations, and a "destruction" mode (in which players compete to destroy buildings in a city) and "melee" mode (in which up to four players can compete simultaneously).


== Plot ==
The plot involves an alien race known as the Vortaak invading the Earth and assuming control of the planet's giant monsters, sending them to attack cities across the globe. One monster breaks free from the Vortaak's control, and battles the other monsters in order to drive off the Vortaak, and that monster is the king of the monsters, Godzilla. 


== Reception ==

The game received "mixed or average reviews" on all platforms according to video game review aggregator Metacritic.Entertainment Weekly gave the GameCube version a B and stated that the game's biggest blunder "is that it just isn't campy enough." However, The Cincinnati Enquirer gave the same version three-and-a-half stars out of five and stated that "while the game has a variety of game-play modes, they aren't very deep once you've mastered the basics." The Village Voice also gave the Xbox version a score of 7 out of 10 and stated that "When buildings light up—Big Ben, say—you can let your opponents know what time it is by picking up the structure and hurling it at them."


== References ==


== External links ==
Godzilla: Destroy All Monsters Melee at MobyGames
Godzilla: Domination! at MobyGames