Power Rangers Dino Thunder is an American television series, the twelfth season of the Power Rangers franchise.
As with all Power Rangers series, it was adapted from a series from the long running Japanese Super Sentai franchise, in this case the 27th entry, Bakuryū Sentai Abaranger. Dino Thunder was also the subtitle of the Korean dub of Abaranger in South Korea and had a similar/identical logo to the American version as well.
The series is notable as it features the return of Jason David Frank reprising his role as Tommy Oliver. It was the first Power Rangers series to be aired on Toon Disney as part of Jetix.


== Plot ==
A soccer player, a computer expert, a singer, an artist, and a teacher with a long history of such situations join forces to become Power Rangers and help save the Earth from the scheming of Mesogog, a dinosauric villain who wishes to eradicate all human life and return Earth to the age of dinosaurs. He is assisted by his minions Elsa, Zeltrax, and army of Tyrannodrones, and an army of Triptoids as well as monsters that they call their Mutations.
In this season, Tommy Oliver, from Mighty Morphin Power Rangers to Power Rangers Turbo fame, returns as a paleontology professor in Reefside, California. When he is assigned three detention students, athlete Conner McKnight, computer expert Ethan James, and singer Kira Ford, by Principal Randall (the human disguise of Elsa), they end up finding the Dino Gems, paving the way for them to become the Dino Rangers. Conner gains the power of the Tyrannozord (based on the Tyrannosaurus), Ethan gains the power of the Tricerazord (based on the Triceratops), and Kira gains the power of the Pterazord (based on the Pteranodon). Tommy (known often as Dr. O) himself once again becomes a Power Ranger by joining the team as the Black Dino Ranger with the power of invisibility, and they are also later joined by Trent Mercer as the White Dino Ranger, with the power of camouflage. Trent must deal with the inner struggle of good and evil, as Tommy himself once had to do as the evil Green Ranger, because he gained his powers from a raw Dino Gem in Mesogog's lab, with the powers originally intended to be Mesogog's. Mesogog is in fact, Trent's adopted father Anton Mercer, who, in a faulty lab experiment, began to mutate into Mesogog. Trent later sides with good and saves his father from the mutation.
During the course of the series, the team adds the following to its arsenal of Zords: Cephalozord (based on the Pachycephalosaurus), Dimetrozord (based on the Dimetrodon), Stegozord (based on the Stegosaurus), Parasaurzord (based on the Parasaurolophus), and Ankylozord (based on the Ankylosaurus). The Stegozord later combines with Trent's zord the Dragozord (based on the Tupuxuara) to form the Dino Stegozord. Tommy pilots the Brachiozord (based on the Brachiosaurus), the carrier for all the other Zords. Conner is also given the power to become the Triassic Ranger, and pilots the Mezodon Rover/Megazord (based on the Styracosaurus) which can combine with the Cephalo, Dimetro, Parasaur and Ankylozords to form the Triceramax Megazord.
At the end of the series, the Rangers destroy Mesogog with their raw Dino Gem power, but the gems are burned out in the process. Just before this, they are also forced to sacrifice all the Zords in their last battle with Zeltrax. Finally they return to their normal lives.


== Characters ==


=== Dino Thunder Rangers ===
Conner McKnight (portrayed by James Napier) - The Red Dino Ranger and Triassic Ranger who gained super-speed.
Ethan James (portrayed by Kevin Duhaney) - The Blue Dino Ranger who gained the ability to harden his skin.
Kira Ford (portrayed by Emma Lahana) - The Yellow Dino Ranger who gained a sonic scream.
Dr. Tommy Oliver (portrayed by Jason David Frank) - The Black Dino Ranger and previously the Green Ranger, the White Ranger, Zeo Ranger V Red, and the first Red Turbo Ranger. When he gained the Black Dino Gem, it granted him the ability to become invisible.
Trent Fernandez (portrayed by Jeffrey Parazzo) - The White Dino Ranger who gained camouflage abilities.


=== Allies ===
Hayley Ziktor (portrayed by Ismay Johnston) - The manager of the Cyberspace Cafe and technical advisor to the Dino Thunder Rangers who previously went to college with Tommy.
Cassidy Cornell (portrayed by Katrina Devine) - A news reporter and classmate of Connor, Ethan, Kira, and Trent.
Devin Del Valle (portrayed by Tom Hern) - The personal assistant of Cassidy.
Dr. Anton Mercer (portrayed by Latham Gaines) - The billionaire and head of Anton Mercer Industries who is Trent's adoptive father and worked with Tommy on combining dinosaur DNA and technology with one of the results being the Tyrannodrones.


=== Villains ===
Mesogog (portrayed by Latham Gaines) - The dinosauroid evil side of Anton Mercer caused by an experiment with dinosaur DNA gone wrong. They both share a Jekyll and Hyde relationship.
Elsa (portrayed by Miriama Smith) - A minion of Mesogog who posed as Principal Randall at Reefside High School.
Zeltrax (voiced by James Gaylyn) - Terrence "Smitty" Smith was a former associate of Tommy Oliver. After Tommy's applications were accepted by Anton Mercer, Terrence was approached by the head of a rival company. While working on a breakthrough, Terrence was caught in a sudden lab explosion and his body was found by Mesogog who recreated him as an ammonite-themed cyborg.
White Dino Ranger Clone (voiced by Adam Gardiner) - An evil clone of the White Dino Ranger created by Zeltrax from Copyotter's salvaged ability and the Geno-Randomizer.
Tyrannodrones - The cybernetic dinosauroid foot soldiers of Mesogog that were originally created by Tommy Oliver and Anton Mercer from a combination of dinosaur DNA and technology to be used for good until they were reprogrammed by Mesogog.
Triptoids - The black and white amoeba-themed creatures originally from the video game "Wizard Wood" who became Mesogog's alternate foot soldiers while also working for Zeltrax. The Triptoids later returned in Power Rangers Beast Morphers where they were revived by Ryjack to assist him in fighting the Beast Morpher Rangers.


==== Monsters ====
The monsters in this series are referred to by this name. They are adapted from the monsters that are featured in Bakuryū Sentai Abaranger. Each Mutation is created in the Geno-Randomizer by combining the DNA of an animal, the DNA of a plant, and the molecular structure of an inanimate object. When defeated, Mesogog uses the Hydro-Regenerator to make the Mutation grow.

Birdbrain - A crow/mentha/sniper monster. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord.
Pollenator (voiced by Alistair Browning) - A squid/osmanthus/vanish monster. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord Cephalo Mode.
Donkeyvac (voiced by Jason Hoyte) - A donkey/pomegranate/vacuum monster. He can steal the youth of anyone. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord.
Demagnetron (voiced by Dallas Barnett) - A diving beetle/rhododendron/magnet monster. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord.
Dysotron (voiced by Andrew Robertt) - A giant dice-themed monster. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord.
Goldenrod (voiced by James Gaylyn) - A clone of Zeltrax created when he used the Geno-Randomizer on himself which resulted in both of them stepping out of it. With Zeltrax treating him like his son, Goldenrod was sent by his father to target Tommy Oliver. Goldenrod was destroyed by the Black Dino Ranger which furthered Zeltrax's personal vendetta against him. He is voiced by James Gaylyn.
Scorpex (voiced by Stephen Brunton) - A clock-themed scorpion monster in hard armor. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord Dimetro Mode.
Megalador (voiced by Paul Barrett) - A shark/oleander/car parts monster. His flower blasts can cause allergic reactions upon anyone and can create tidal waves. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord Stego Mode.
Creature (voiced by Carl Bland) - An lion/dandelion/bomb monster that Elsa and Zeltrax created to lure out the White Ranger. This monster was destroyed by the White Dino Ranger.
Angor (voiced by Peter Feeney) - An anchor-themed monster. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord Parasaur Mode.
Angor 1.5 (voiced by Peter Feeney) - A revived and upgraded version of Angor. This monster was destroyed by the Dino Stegazord.
Rojobot (voiced by Mark Wright) - A robotic meteor-themed monster. It was first a cowardly monster until it was exposed to a strange meteorite that changed its personality. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord Ankylo Mode.
Insectolite (voiced by John Leigh) - A centipede/pansy/TV satellite monster. This monster was destroyed by the Dino Stegazord Cephalo and Dimetro Mode.
Fossilador (voiced by Glen Drake) - A theropod skeleton monster made from the fossil remains of a project that was previously worked on by Dr. Oliver and Dr. Anton Mercer who had to dismantle it when it was out of their control. Using his mind-control, Fossilidor manipulated Kira to help put him back together. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord.
Termitetron (voiced by Scott Wills) - A fly/wishing shrine/pine monster. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord.
Ka-Ching (voiced by Greg Johnson) - A bear/mushroom/ATM monster that was featured in the Japanese show based on the Power Rangers (actually part of an episode of Abaranger). This monster was destroyed by the Z-Rex Blaster.
Mad Mackerel (voiced by Cameron Rhodes) - Elsa used the Geno Randomizer to turn Marty the Mackerel from "The Funky Fisherman Show" into this bonito/olive/fishing rod monster. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord Ankylo and Parasaur Mode. Afterwards, Marty the Mackerel was restored.
Copyotter (voiced by Andrew Laing) - A sea otter/green pepper/photocopier monster. His special power was the ability to copy the Rangers' weapons, attacks and even their voices. He even made three copies of Cassidy after getting into an argument with her. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord Ankylo Mode. Afterwards, Zeltrax salvaged Copyotter's ability and combined with the Geno-Randomizer to create the White Dino Ranger Clone.
White Terrorsaurus (voiced by Mark Wright) - A Tupuxuara-themed monster created by Zeltrax from the White Dino Ranger clone's energy. This monster was destroyed by the Triassic Ranger.
White Terrorsaurus II (voiced by Mark Wright) - A much deadlier version of the White Terrorsaurus was recreated by the White Ranger Clone on Elsa's orders. Elsa fed the creature a crystal she mined that contained the same energy signature as the Rangers' Dino Gems, making it stronger and allowing it to drain the Dino Rangers' powers. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord.
Other World Monster - A rhinoceros/sugar beet/psychic monster. He was created in a simulation to test the White Ranger Clone's power. This monster was easily destroyed alongside Megalador and the as-yet-unintroduced Horn-Rimmed Monster.
Jupitor (voiced by Joel Tobeck) - A Jupiter-based robotic monster. This monster was destroyed by the Mezodon Megazord.
Tutenhawken (voiced by Derek Judge) - A vulture/lychee/treasure box monster from Ancient Egypt. When the Rangers are on a field trip, Ethan translates some Egyptian hieroglyphics which unleashes Tutenhawken's curse on him while also awakening him. The curse could only be removed by defeating Tutenhawken in the air which Ethan did with the Hovercraft Cycle. This monster was destroyed by the Mezodon Rover.
Thornox (voiced by Anthony Ray Parker) - A leech/gentiana/lapis lazuli monster created by Elsa from a plant that she injected with some special steroids. This monster was destroyed by the Mezodon Megazord.
Deadwood (voiced by Andy Faulkner) - A tree monster created by Zeltrax from the Tree of Life. This monster was destroyed by the Triceramax Megazord. Jade Gladiator later revived Deadwood to help fight the Rangers. This time, he was destroyed by the Dino Stegazord.
Horn-Rimmed Monster (voiced by Peter Daube) - A rat/iris/glasses monster that can cause volcanic eruptions. Elsa used the Geno Randomizer to turn a volcanologist named Dr. Norton Morton into this monster. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord Stego Mode. Afterwards, Dr. Morton was restored.
Jade Gladiator (voiced by Geoff Dolan) - When Anton Mercer becomes Mesogog in Mercer's lab, he grabbed an experimental plant and transformed it into the Jade Gladiator. Jade Gladiator uses his botanic power in his giant plant-like form to revive Deadwood and create a new monster called Skortch. This monster was destroyed by the Valkosaurus Megazord.
Skortch (voiced by Jim McLarty) - A phoenix-like beast created by Jade Gladiator. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord.
Squidrose (voiced by Tony Blackett) - A chameleon/balsam/pharmacy prescription monster. Elsa's Dream Machine hooked up to the Geno-Randomizer had this monster manifested into Tommy's dream after he had calamari for dinner. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord Ankylo Mode.
Croco D'Vile (voiced by Ray Trout) - A crocodile/fatsia/telephone monster. Elsa's dream machine hooked up to the Geno-Randomizer had this monster manifested into Kira's dream after having to do a report on reptiles. Croco D'Vile tried to hit on Kira during the battle. Kira woke up after Croco D'Vile was defeated.
Rumba Monkey (voiced by Jonathan Burgh) - A monkey/7 spring herbs/drums monster. Elsa's dream machine hooked up to the Geno-Randomizer had this monster manifested into Ethan's dream after looking at a picture of a monkey. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus Megazord. Before exploding, Rumba Monkey quoted "Rumba Monkey has left the building."
Rude Elf (voiced by Tim Faville) - A reindeer/mistletoe monster dressed as Santa Claus. Elsa's dream machine hooked up to the Geno-Randomizer had this monster manifested into Conner's dream upon having to do early Christmas shopping with his mother. This monster was destroyed by the Triceramax Megazord.
Fridgia (voiced by Penny Ashton) - A female ice-elemental monster made inside a comic book world that was drawn by Carson Brady upon receiving a special pen from Elsa in her guise of Principal Randall. This monster was destroyed by the Triassic Ranger's Battlizer Mode.
Ruby Dragon (voiced by Bruce Hopkins) - A red dragon/orchard/gondola monster created by Elsa from the "Dragon Wars" Ruby Dragon card that she as Principal Randall confiscated. This monster was destroyed by the Thundersaurus and Mezodon Megazords along with the Dino Stegazord.
Ugly Monster (voiced by James Coleman) - With Mesogog's new found power after being separated from Anton Mercer, he creates this unnamed monster that evokes the traits of Izzy and Pupperazi to take down the Power Rangers. After being taken down, he transferred his power to the Replicant Zord. When the Replicant Zord was destroyed, the Ugly Monster appeared in giant size to fight the Megazords. This monster was destroyed by the Dino Stegazord.


==== Returning villains ====
Lothor (portrayed by Grant McFarland) - An old enemy of the Ninja Rangers who escapes from the Abyss of Evil.
Zurgane (voiced by Peter Rowley) - A robot who is one of Lothor's generals.


=== Guest stars ===
Shane Clarke (portrayed by Pua Magasiva) - The Red Wind Ranger.
Tori Hanson (portrayed by Sally Martin) - The Blue Wind Ranger.
Waldo "Dustin" Brooks (portrayed by Glenn McMillan) - The Yellow Wind Ranger.
Hunter Bradley (portrayed by Adam Tuominen) - The Crimson Thunder Ranger.
Blake Bradley (portrayed by Jorgito Vargas, Jr.) - The Navy Thunder Ranger and the brother of Hunter.
Cameron "Cam" Watanabe (portrayed by Jason Chan) - The Green Samurai Ranger.
Sensei Kanoi Watanabe (portrayed by Grant McFarland) - The sensei of the Wind Rangers and the father of Cam.
Marah (portrayed by Katrina Devine) - The niece of Lothor who defected to the Wind Rangers' side.
Kapri (portrayed by Katrina Brown) - The niece of Lothor and sister of Marah who defected to the Wind Rangers' side.


== Episodes ==


== Production ==
Due to the mention that Power Rangers solely existed as a comic book in Power Rangers Ninja Storm, many fans believed that series existed in a different universe than that of the original Power Rangers series. (However, Power Rangers in Space had previously mentioned a Ranger-based comic book in its crossover with Ninja Turtles: The Next Mutation). Fans also believed this due to the lack of a Ninja Storm/Wild Force team-up episode, partly due to the actors refusing to come since much of the production crew had been laid off as well as the change in hands of the Power Rangers franchise from Saban to Disney and filming locations from United States to New Zealand. Executive producer Douglas Sloan also received heavy criticism for not tying Ninja Storm in with the original universe.
To tie up all of the loose Ninja Storm ends, and to try to bring in a larger audience, Sloan brought back Jason David Frank and his original character, the once evil turned hero, green, white, red, and now black ranger from Mighty Morphin Power Rangers through Power Rangers Turbo, Tommy Oliver, a legendary Power Ranger, as a mentor for the new team as well as a fellow Power Ranger. Jason Frank has said that he did the show as a favor for Sloan. Through the episodes "Legacy of Power" (the 500th episode overall), a look back on all of the previous Power Rangers series; "Back in Black", giving Tommy new Power Ranger powers; "Fighting Spirit", seeing Tommy encounter his previous Ranger forms and airing on the eleventh anniversary of Power Rangers no less; and "Thunder Storm", a team-up arc between Dino Thunder and Ninja Storm, all previous series were included in the original Power Rangers universe.
Also in the season premiere "Day of the Dino", Mesogog knew of Lothor as he mentioned Reefside would believe he had returned to town, although Blue Bay Harbor was Lothor's target in Ninja Storm.
However considering Conner's twin brother attended the Wind Ninja Academy it is possible the two towns are relatively nearby one another, explaining Mesogog's statement.
Dino Thunder also was the first Power Rangers series to overtly acknowledge its Super Sentai roots with an episode entitled "Lost and Found in Translation," which featured a Japanese show based on the Power Rangers dubbed in English. In actuality, the footage used in that episode was from episode 10 ("Abare League Bind") of Dino Thunder's source series, Bakuryū Sentai Abaranger, dubbed in a manner similar to the comedic parody dub of Kagaku Sentai Dynaman in the late 1980s.


== Video games ==
There were two games produced for Dino Thunder. On the Game Boy Advance, there was a sidescrolling game, which was a platformer involving fighting several villains from the series. The other game was produced for the PlayStation 2 and the Nintendo GameCube. This was the first Power Rangers game produced on a sixth generation console. All the action takes place inside the zords. This game also had some inconsistencies with the television series to allow the action to take place in the zords while battling the regular enemies who were human size.


== Home media ==
Currently, 23 of the 38 episodes are available in various volumes on DVD in Region 1, whereas a complete box set was released in Region 2 on July 14, 2008. Shout! Factory has released the entire series as part of their "Seasons 8 – 12" DVD box set. The complete Region 1 season is now available individually as of October 2016.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Power Rangers Website
Power Rangers Dino Thunder at IMDb