Shrek is a 2001 platform video game developed by Digital Illusions CE (DICE) and published by TDK Mediactive for the Xbox, based on the 2001 animated DreamWorks film Shrek. This is the only video game that is not an action-adventure like in Shrek 2. It is also the only Shrek video game to be rated T for Teen by the ESRB. The game was released on November 15, 2001 as one of 22 North American launch titles for the Xbox and March 28, 2002 in Europe. A reworked version of the game, called Shrek Extra Large, was released for the GameCube on October 31, 2002 in North America and on October 24, 2003 in Europe. A port for the PlayStation 2 was planned for 2003, once again under the name Shrek: Extra Large, but was cancelled due to TDK Mediactive being acquired by Take-Two Interactive later that year, as a result losing the rights for Shrek games. Extra Large uses the same engine and game mechanics as the original Xbox release, but with an altered story and different levels.
The game was noted for being one of the first commercial titles to make use of deferred shading.


== Gameplay ==
The player completes objectives named "Good Deeds". In most objectives, the player hunts for an object and completes an action. Not many objectives vary from this, though a few will occasionally vary.


== Plot ==
Following a completely different narrative than that of the eponymous film which it is based on, Shrek is meant to be a "continuation" of the story of the film, taking place after the title character has set out to regain his swamp and become a "'de facto' hero" to the fairy tale creatures. Shrek is delivered a message by the infamous Magic Mirror that his wife Princess Fiona has been captured by an evil wizard, Merlin. Shrek must travel to Merlin's Dark Tower Fortress of Pure Evil, but an impassable fog has been laid across the Fairy Tale Lands. The fog and Merlin's Fortress can be passed through the completion of Good Deeds. The Magic Mirror gives Shrek a Book of Good Deeds and offers to teleport him to places where Good Deeds are required.


== Development ==
On December 20, 2000, TDK Mediactive signed a five-year deal with Dreamworks to produce video games based on the Shrek license; the plan upon signing was to release a Game Boy title coinciding with the film's release and issue another game for "a next generation platform" in the fourth quarter of 2001. On February 6, 2001, the next-generation console was announced to be Xbox, development duties would go towards Sandbox Studios, and the game would use character and object models from the original movie. On May 16, 2001, IGN released nine clips of gameplay footage from the Xbox title, noting "details in the graphics including loads of bump mapping an [sic] per pixel shading."


== Reception ==

On December 11, 2001, TDK Mediactive CFO Martin Paravato reported sales for both Fairy Tale Freakdown and the Xbox game making up "a significant portion of our revenue." Shrek was the ninth-highest selling Xbox for the month of November 2001, selling 45,900 units and making up 2.6% of the console's revenue.As of October 2002, total units of all of TDK's Shrek games released at the time, including the Game Boy Color, Xbox, and Gamecube games as well as Hassle at the Castle (2002), totaled over 1.2 million units in sales.Reviews of the game range from very mixed to negative. GameRankings and Metacritic gave it a score of 52% and 49 out of 100 for the Xbox version, and 34% and 36 out of 100 for the GameCube version. Reviewers criticized the gameplay in particular, as well as the audio. IGN described the game's puzzles as "run of the mill" and complained of the lack of audio in certain sections of the game. X-Play criticized the GameCube version's framerate, "jerky" animation, and camera control claiming it could make some players nauseous. Critics generally praised the game's graphical presentation, with X-Play's Skyler Miller saying the game's graphics were "impressive at a standstill" and Raymond Padilla of GameSpy claiming the in-game graphics matched the movie's visuals. The Gamecube version's visuals were less favorably received, with IGN critiquing the game's lack of bump mapping when transitioned over to the Gamecube as well as the poor animation.


== References ==


== External links ==
Shrek at MobyGames