The Fairly OddParents: Breakin' Da Rules is a video game released for the Game Boy Advance, GameCube, PlayStation 2, Xbox, and Windows in North America in 2003. It is based on the Nickelodeon cartoon The Fairly OddParents. It was developed by Blitz Games and published by THQ. 
Its sequel, The Fairly OddParents: Shadow Showdown was released on the GameCube, Game Boy Advance and PlayStation 2.


== Plot ==
Timmy Turner's mother and father have gone on a vacation and left Timmy with the evil babysitter Vicky. When Timmy tries to make a wish, his fairy godparents Cosmo and Wanda tell him that it's against "Da Rules". Outraged, Timmy wishes he didn't have to follow the rules. As a result, Cosmo destroys the book; when Vicky arrives, she gains possession of Da Rules. She wishes that Timmy was still sleeping, and since she has possession of a fairy item, her wish is granted. Timmy, Cosmo, and Wanda go to Fairy Court and are accused of destroying Da Rules. Jorgen gives the three of them 49½ hours to find the missing pages of Da Rules. Timmy must navigate through ten levels and find the pages before Vicky's wishing goes too far. By the end of the game, everything is back to normal and Da Rules has all of its pages back.
The PC version features a different plot. In this version, Juandissimo Magnifico tricks Timmy into wishing the book destroyed so that Cosmo and Wanda will get in trouble for it. It also notably features an appearance by Vicky and Tootie's mother (at Timmy's age, as the level featuring her is set in the past), named Nicky. Here, she is shown behaving a lot like Tootie, and Timmy initially mistakes her for Tootie when he first sees her, although the in-game graphics depict her as resembling a young Vicky.
In the Game Boy Advance version, Anti-Cosmo arrives to steal the book, and Vicky is defeated at the very end to restore peace.


== Voice cast ==
Source: closing credits
Tara Strong as Timmy Turner
Daran Norris as Cosmo, Dad, Jorgen von Strangle, Crimson Chin, Comicbook Anchorman; Anti-Cosmo (Game Boy Advance version only)
Susanne Blakeslee: Wanda, Mom
Grey DeLisle as Vicky, Tootie (console version only), Nicky (PC version only), Spatula Woman, Créme Puffs
Gary LeRoi Gray as AJ
Jason Marsden as Chester, Male Shopper
Carlos Alazraqui as Crocker, Juandissimo (PC version only), Mayor of Dimmsdale, Country Boy
Faith Abrahams as Female Shopper
Laraine Newman as Alien Queen Jipjorrulac
Rob Paulsen as King Grippulon, Dog Catcher, Fairy Judge, Guard, Anti-Fairies, Squirrelly Scouts, Arthur, Gilded Arches


== Reception ==

The game received mixed to positive reviews. IGN gave this game 5.0/10. The GameRankings aggregate score was highest for the PlayStation 2 version (73%); the others were slightly negative, as far down as 40% on the PC.


== References ==